
# Another Heavyweight Example

**This example uses features that are not yet implemented!**

# Problem statement

To investigate strange effects concerning repeated provisionings and additional entitlements, we want to analyze all identities' entitlements, comparing the entitlements granted by the assigned roles with those aggregated from the endpoints and also the IdentityEntitlements IIQ reports.

So, what we need to do, for every identity, is:

- determine the entitlements granted by all assigned roles
- determine the entitlements on all link objects
- determine the identity entitlements associated with entitlements
- correlate the data gathered from these three sources to form a joint representation

The goal is to get for every identity and every entitlement present on any of the three sources one row with the information from all of the sources. We would normally present this as a table using TabularData to, for instance, create a CSV file, but for simplicity will use the same type of console output we already used in [A Heavyweight Example](/spaces/OCA/pages/218120051/A+Heavyweight+Example). Since we are interested in only the discrepancies, we will also have to establish a selection condition to skip all rows where data is consistent.

# Solution

For executing the query we use the same `generic_query` script we used in [A Heavyweight Example](/spaces/OCA/pages/218120051/A+Heavyweight+Example). Our current task differs from [A Heavyweight Example](/spaces/OCA/pages/218120051/A+Heavyweight+Example) in that it doesn't have a complex selection condition but instead requires nontrivial data mangling since data from three sources is to be merged.

As a result of the simpler selection condition, this query would be easier to implement in Java code than [A Heavyweight Example](/spaces/OCA/pages/218120051/A+Heavyweight+Example) - but still, preparing the data for the detail rows would become quite a bit of work. So, despite this will not be an easy read, hold on.

# Preparing the detail rows

Referring to [A Heavyweight Example](/spaces/OCA/pages/218120051/A+Heavyweight+Example), you will see that the `collectionAttribute` expression is responsible for delivering the detail rows. It was not especially complicated there, consisting of only an attribute path. In the current example however, creating the expression is the most challenging part of the task.

To be able to correlate the entitlements gathered from the three sources to present them in a single row, obviously some sort of indexing must be applied to each of them. Using a common key, we can then iterate over the union set of all keys and retrieve, for each key, the corresponding data from each source's index.

We will use the key format `application::attribute::value` which will uniquely identify an entitlement. Since neither `application` nor `attribute` can contain colons, we need not worry about key collisions.

For simplicity, we will let the `collectionAttribute` expression deliver only a sequence of these keys since all what is required from it is an *Iterable* representing the detail rows. Each one is identified by a key, and there is no need to build complex row objects within the `collectionAttribute` expression - retrieving the real row data can be deferred to where it is needed. You'll understand what this means in a minute.

The following `collectionAttribute` expression will do the four steps outlined in the [Problem statement ](#problem-statement)section. Keep in mind that it is applied to the `Identity` object:

```
:union(
	:flatten(assignedRoles#flattenedRequirements#profiles#constraints#value)
		:index(:format(${^.^.application.name}::${^.property}::${@}))
		:set(roleEntitlements)
		:map(key),
	:flatten(links#entitlementAttributes#value)
		:index(:format(${^.^.application.name}::${^.key}::${@}))
		:set(accountEntitlements)
		:map(key),
	:IdentityEntitlement([application.notNull() && identity.id==$"id"])
		:index(:format(${appName}::${name}::${value}))
		:set(identityEntitlements)
		:map(key)
)
```

It will deliver a sequence of row keys in the aforementioned format and have the indexed entitlements from every source stored in three pseudo attributes `roleEntitlements`, `accountEntitlements` and `identityEntitlements` of the `Identity` object.

It uses three expressions to compute and index the entitlements from each of the sources, store the result in the `Identity` object and extract the key set containing the row keys contributed by the respective source. The three key sets are then merged into a single collection which is returned. Each key represents a detail row.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Observe the different parents
>
> Note that the row keys contained in the result of this expression have the `Identity` object as parent and thus have access to the artificial attributes set by the `collectionAttribute` expression. On the contrary, the values contained in the index buckets retrieved from those attributes by the `:lookup()` operations all still have their original parents as set by the corresonding `:flatten()` operation, so they give access to the entire object chain above them in the original data structure.

# Creating the output

Before going to the selection rules that, of course, will be checked *before* any output is generated, let's see how to get from the key representing a detail row to its data. Having understood this, it will be easier to move on to the selection rules. So, not thinking about any selection, let's assume we want to output the information from the three sources for all entitlements of every identity for a visual comparison and consistency check.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> As stated, the natural presentation for this sort of data would be a table. However, to keep things simple and since we are essentially only interested in the *expressions* yielding the data, we will stick to the output type of [A Heavyweight Example](/spaces/OCA/pages/218120051/A+Heavyweight+Example) and use a simple multiline text format.

We will define the `format` parameter for the `generic_query` as follows. Note that the input to this expressions is the detail row key, which as already explained has the `Identity` object as parent:

```
${^.displayName}
	entitlement = ${@}
	granting roles = :lookup(^.roleEntitlements,@):map(^.^.^.^.name):join(, )
	aggregated = :lookup(^.accountEntitlements,@):map(^.^.nativeIdentity):join(, )
	detection = :lookup(^.identityEntitlements,@):map(:format(assigned/grantedByRole=${assigned}/${grantedByRole})):join(, )
```

Let's look how we get from the detail row key to the data from every source.

The lookup on line 3 gives us a list of all the entitlements produced by the `:flatten()` operation on line 2 of the `collectionAttribute` expression that evaluated to the same key (`application::attribute::value`) so that they were collected by the `:index()` operation into the same bucket. We would normally expect this list, if present, to be of size one, but as multiple roles might cause an entitlement to be assigned, it indeed might contain the same entitlement multiple times (with different parent paths). So, as an additional information we get the assigned role from each of them by four consecutive parent navigations, fetch its `name` attribute and print all role names as a comma separated list.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> If we were interested in only if *any* assigned role grants this entitlement, we would substitute the `:map()` instruction by `:format(true)` to have it output "true" if a list *is* there. (Note that the `:format()` instruction is *not* executed if the lookup returns `null`. If it *is* executed however, it returns the literal given to it as the formatting template - since there are no placeholders to substitute.)

On line 4, the lookup returns a list of the link entitlement attribute values evaluating to the same key. If it contained more than one value, this would mean that the entitlement were assigned to the identity multiple times (on different accounts probably). So, to be clear about this, we get the `nativeIdentity` of each account. (If we would only want to see if the entitlement *is* assigned, we would use the procedure outlined in the above info box here again.)

Line 5 retrieves from the corresponding artificial attribute all IdentityEntitlements for the key and prints them in a comma separated list with the information about *assigned* and *grantedByRole* state. (We would normally expect only one IdentityEntitlement per entitlement key but...)

# Performing the selection

Now, as we know the data our query delivers, we can more easily identify the records we are only interested in. As a first approximation, we would one of the following conditions to flag an inconsistency worth investigating:

- No role is granting the entitlement.
- The entitlement is not assigned to the identity.
- Any of those two conditions is reported by an `IdentityEntitlement` or there is no `IdentityEntitlement` at all.

The selection rule checking these conditions is as follows. Note that, as with output, the object submitted to the *accept* action is the entitlement key. There are no checks performed on the `Identity` object:

```javascript
Identity().accept(
	or(
		eq(":lookup(^.roleEntitlements,@)", null),
 		eq(":lookup(^.accountEntitlements,@)", null),
  		eq(":lookup(^.identityEntitlements,@)", null),
 		any(":lookup(^.identityEntitlements,@)",
			or(
				ne("assigned", true),
 				ne("grantedByRole", true)
		    )
		)
	)
);
```

If we wanted to select also all rows where there are multiple assignments of the same entitlement or multiple IdentityEntitlements, we could add the corresponding conditions to the `or()` - provided the necessary selectors have been implemented.
