
# Best practices for using the Generic Query

There are a couple of challenges you will face when using the Generic Query:

- To query data, you have to know it. And to know your data, you have to see it. This is kind of a chicken-and-egg problem, and it is best solved by an iterative approach. Of course, the [IIQ documentation](https://identitiq.localdomain.com/identityiq/doc/javadoc/index.html) can be a good start and is certainly needed for reference, but trying to create queries in a waterfall approach from it *alone* will be both unnecessarily hard and not the quickest way to achieve the goal.
- When crafting queries, you will inevitably have to debug them at some point because they don't do what you expect. Also, you may want to get *additional* confidence that your code really does what you intended when the result already looks plausible so far.

To help you survive the challenges that expect you on your way with the Generic Query, we have collected some tips.

- [Limit the output](#limit-the-output)
- [Look at the XML](#look-at-the-xml)
- [Continue working in a new tab](#continue-working-in-a-new-tab)
- [Beware of session timeouts](#beware-of-session-timeouts)
- [Debug the expressions before using them](#debug-the-expressions-before-using-them)
- [Build up incrementally](#build-up-incrementally)
- [List the objects before grouping them](#list-the-objects-before-grouping-them)
- [Use the class attribute](#use-the-class-attribute)
- [Search for edge cases](#search-for-edge-cases)
- [Invert the selection condition](#invert-the-selection-condition)
- [Use whitespace wisely and consider using macros](#use-whitespace-wisely-and-consider-using-macros)

# Limit the output

When creating a new query, it's often a good idea to limit the *Maximum rows* to not waste time waiting for the complete result set to be processed when the goal is only to see if the query works and produces the expected kind of output. For linear queries, the limit will apply to the number of output rows, and for grouping queries to the number of objects aggregated into the grouping.

Note hat when a *Collection expression* is used, the number of secondary objects is restricted, so in most cases the last primary object's collection will not be iterated to end.

# Look at the XML

Looking at the XML is probably the easiest and quickest way to dig out what you need to compose your query. Simply start your exploration with the object class and maybe a basic selection and/or setting a maximum rows count, and a *single column*:

```
:toXml
```

Then click on the link (see next tip below) and start composing your query in the new tab.

When navigating the object model creating new column expressions, including working with collections, you can use the same technique to first look at the XML of the navigated-to object (if the object *is* an XML object, of course). For collections, use an expression like this:

```
:map(:toXml):join
```

This can also be a quick-and-dirty way to see what you need without investing further time into a *real* query.

# Continue working in a new tab

When incrementally building up a query, it is often helpful to open it in a new tab, leaving the current one open for reference. To do this, simply click on the link to the right of the execute button. Having the old result and the old code may be really helpful when the changes you made to the query cause problems.

When debugging a problem, it is also helpful to do this in a new tab with a copy of the query. This way, you are free to do any changes, remove code you suspect is causing the exception and lots of other things without impacting the version you were working on when the exception hit you. After having found the solution, you can return your unmodified query and apply it there without needing to rely on the undo buffer.

# Beware of session timeouts

The Rulerunner will *never* cover a tab you have kept open with this nasty IIQ standard timeout shield preventing you from accessing it any further. This means, you can keep your Generic Query tabs for reference as long as you need.

Be aware, however, that the tab nevertheless may timeout *invisibly*. If you then try to execute the query again, the query will either hang (when there is no active session any more) or it will throw a NullPointerException (when a new session was established). In any case you will lose the previous output. To be sure, to re-execute the query in an already open tab, consider opening it in a new tab for execution by clicking the link.

You won't lose any edits you might have done though since upon executing, the link will be updated first, so by clicking it you will get your inputs in a new *living* tab.

# Debug the expressions before using them

Before building onto a complex expression, make sure it gives the correct results. It will be much harder to spot errors once you have sunken an erroneous expression into a selection rule, for instance. The best way to debug expressions is to first have it as a column expression. After you have verified that it produces the correct result, you can paste it in the place you need it.

# Build up incrementally

Don't do waterfall development, use incremental prototyping instead. Start with a simple expression and step by step add code to it until the target is met.

A good approach is often also to *duplicate* the expression you are working on in a new column to still have the result of the previous processing step available for reference after having added new processings.

# List the objects before grouping them

When composing grouping queries, it's a good idea to first make sure you have the right objects to group and your grouping expressions work. You can debug all this using a normal (linear) query. When done, move (in a new tab!) the grouping expressions from the *Output* field to the *Grouping expressions* field.

# Use the `class` attribute

When, at some time, you got lost navigating up the parent hierarchy and your expressions don't behave as you expect, or to quickly determine the type of some attribute value without going to the documentation, you can always examine the `class` attribute that every object has. It will tell you

# Search for edge cases

You have crafted a query, and scrolling through the result, it looks like it does what you expect. To get more confidence about this, you might want to temporarily add a selection condition that filters out the cases you already know are correctly handled. The resulting shorter output might reveal some special cases not yet covered by your code.

Often, this will also reveal data that shouldn't be there, so you will get data maintenance for free.

# Invert the selection condition

You have successfully crafted a filter condition, and the query output shows you that there is nothing that should have been filtered out. To be *sure* that you got this result not by accident because there simply was *no data* to filter out, you can challenge your query by inverting the selection condition. If the effect is as expected, you can be confident that your code indeed works.

# Use whitespace wisely and consider using macros

Whitespace helps to structure code for easier understanding. In particular, OrionQLs *hidden linebreaks feature* allows to format expressions on multiple lines using indentation. Even comments can be added. But don't exaggerate, since every character eventually needs to be encoded in the URL representing the query, and URLs have a limited length. Use no more than two spaces per indentation level, one space is recommended.

For complex expressions, once you have finished their development, consider turning them into reusable macros, or even factoring subexpressions into macros. Since macros have a name and a description, this also helps to understand the code.

Also, avoid reinventing the wheel and examine the macro libraries for macros that might already do what you need.
