
# Using Regular Expressions

Regular expressions, for short RE or regex, are an important concept that every software engineer should be familiar with. Mastering them allows to do amazing things with very little effort. They are also used by the Object Query Framework, substantially providing to its power. So the following short introduction is intended to quickly get you on track. As there is a lot more to learn, feel free however at any time to directly refer to the [Java regular expressions](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/regex/Pattern.html) reference or some other internet resource. For a deep understanding, I recommend [Regular-Expressions.info](https://www.regular-expressions.info/).

You might have seen regular expressions in the past and may have been scared by the seemingly unrecognizable and cryptic syntax full of backslashes, dots and parentheses, and then decided to stay away from them. But trust me: In fact, regular expressions are quite easy to understand. (However, as always: The more of simple elementary building blocks get assembled into a whole, the more complex this whole becomes.) What makes regular expressions different from most other languages like Java that commonly have lots of redundancy, is their notational *density*. This makes them sometimes hard to read, however, with time the notation will feel natural to you. While the power of regular expressions has its price it's worth it (I can promise 🙂). The nice thing is that you can start with the easy stuff and slowly progress to more advanced uses. The learning curve is quite flat.

Using regular expressions, with time you will discover that they have many applications in areas that you did never think of before. I cannot promise that regular expressions will change your whole life but it's kind of that... 😉 

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Why such a cryptic syntax?
>
> While in common languages most of the characters that make up the constructs are redundant, in regular expressions each character counts. It's *pure* business logic with almost no overhead.
>
> Regular expressions would probably have been much less successful and useful if they used a more verbose notation and, for instance, to match a logon ID, instead of `\busr[a-z0-9]{3}\b` one would have to write something like this:
>
> ```javascript
> matchSequence(
> 	matchWordBoundary(),
> 	matchLiteral('usr'),
> 	matchFixedNumberOfOccurrences(3,
> 		matchAnyOf(
> 			matchAnyCharacterInRange('a', 'z'),
>  			matchAnyCharacterInRange('0', '9')
> 		)
> 	),
> 	matchWordBoundary()
> )
> ```
> Replacing the concise regexp syntax, spreading the few characters to be matched over a dozen lines, would, besides requiring additional labour, effectively *obfuscate* the construct's meaning rather than helping to understand it. It also wouldn't add any error detection possibilities concerning the business logic.

So, what are regular expressions?

In short, they are a means to search for text. You probably already have searched for words or text snippets in the past within your word processor, email client, editor or IDE. In some cases you might have felt the need to make the search more flexible, allowing to match text not exactly but with some flexibility. This is exactly what regular expressions are about: They are patterns to match against text.

The simplest type of patterns is literal text - it finds exactly *that* text. For instance, the regular expression `abc` will find the text `abc`. No complicated framework to learn - isn't that easy?

But let's go step by step. For quick reference, each construct will be introduced using a dedicated bullet point, so at any time you can get a quick overview by scanning only these without reading the rest of the text. Alternatively, since every construct is also covered by an example, you can scan the boxes with the examples instead.

- [Basics](#basics)
- [Anchoring](#anchoring)
- [Character classes](#character-classes)
- [Quantifiers](#quantifiers)
- [Captures](#captures)
- [Backslashes](#backslashes)

# Basics

Alphanumeric and whitespace characters, as well as a number of punctuation characters, can be matched literally:

- The simplest regular expression is a single letter or digit, and it matches exactly itself.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Example
>
> The regular expression `a` finds the character `a` anywhere in the input.

Letters and digits are not the only characters matching themselves, but for the beginning assume that all other characters are special. You will get familiar with the special meanings and where they are absent over time.

The next level is *concatenating* regular expressions:

- A sequence of regular expressions matches the sequence of what each regular expressions matches.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Example
>
> The regular expression `abc` finds the character sequence `abc` anywhere in the input.

Instead of concatenating, regular expressions can be ORed together, meaning that the resulting regular expression will match if *any* of the expressions matches. You will probably not need this in the beginning:

- A `|` character can be used to compose several regular expressions into one that will match if any of the constituent expressions matches.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Example
>
> The regular expression `abc|def|ghi` finds any of these character sequences: `abc`, `def` or `ghi`

When using `|`, be aware that this operation has the weakest precedence, so parentheses might be needed to achieve what is intended.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Example
>
> The regular expression `The (quick|slow) brown fox` will match `The quick brown fox` as well as `The slow brown fox`. (Without the parentheses, it wouldn't work as intended but match `The quick` as well as `slow brown fox`.)

Note that, as explained below, the parentheses at the same time also establish a *capturing group*.

# Anchoring

To make matches more specific, regular expressions can be anchored to certain boundaries in the input. Most common is matching the start or end of the input or both:

- `^`matches the start of a line.
- $ matches the end of a line.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Examples
>
> The regular expression `^a` finds the character `a` only if it occurs at the start of the line.
>
> The regular expression `c$` finds the character `c` only if it occurs at the end of the line.
>
> The regular expression `^abc$` matches exactly the input `abc` and nothing else.

Note that we have been talking here about start and end of *lines*, not of the *input string*. As long as the input string does not contain line breaks, there is no difference here. Otherwise the behavior depends on if the regular expression operates in *line* or *multiline* mode. See the documentation for details.

There are more boundary matchers. Apart from `\A` and `\Z` matching the start and end of the *whole* input, for instance also word boundaries can be matched (using `\b`). See the documentation for details.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Example
>
> Using the word boundary matchers, to match words that look like user IDs we could use the regular expression `\busr[a-z0-9]{3}\b` that matches `usr` at the start of a word followed by three digits or lowercase letters that end the word. (For the `[]` and `{}` constructs, see below.)

# Character classes

Where literal matches are not enough, character ranges and wildcards come to rescue:

- A dot (`.`) matches any character. (It will however *not* match a line break character unless requested by setting the corresponding regular expression flag. See the documentation.)
- Enclosing several characters into square brackets allows to match any character from this set. The notation accepts also character *ranges* like `A-Z`. The selection can be inverted by placing a ^ immediately after the opening bracket - causing the construct to instead match any character *except* the specified ones.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Examples
>
> The regular expression `a.c` matches any three-character sequence starting with `a` and ending with `c`.
>
> The regular expression `a[xy]c` matches the character sequences `axc` and `ayc`.
>
> The regular expression `a[^b]c` matches any three-character sequence starting with `a` and ending with `c` where the middle character is not `b`.
>
> The regular expression `a[a-z0-9]c` matches any three-character sequence starting with `a` and ending with `c` where the middle character is a lowercase letter or a digit.

There are also predefined character classes like `\d` for digits and `\s` for whitespace characters, but you for the start you will get by with using only the above constructs. Refer to the documentation when you are ready to move ahead.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Within the square brackets, all characters lose their special meaning, so there is no need to escape special characters like the dot. There are, however, three characters that need to be handled specially:
>
> - A closing bracket or a minus to be part of the list must be listed before all other characters.
> - A `^` to be part of the list must not be listed in the first position.

# Quantifiers

By following an expression with a so-called quantifier, the number of matches of it can be specified:

- A ? will cause the preceding regular expression to match zero or one time.
- A + will cause the preceding regular expression to match one or more times.
- A \* will cause the preceding regular expression to match zero or more times.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Examples
>
> The regular expression `ab?c` will match the character sequences `ac` and `abc`.
>
> The regular expression `ab+c` will match any character sequence starting with `a` and ending with `c` and having one or more `b`'s between.
>
> The regular expression `ab*c` will match any character sequence starting with `a` and ending with `c` and having any number of `b`'s between (including zero).

The `.*` pattern is a quick - but somewhat dangerous - way to match any uninteresting optional parts of the input. So, in the *fox* example above, you could use the quick and dirty expression `The .* brown fox`, matching `The`  followed by anything and ending with `brown fox`. When using this type of greedy (see below) unspecific patterns, however, always watch out for unintended matches. As an example, understand what this pattern will match in the following text: `The quick brown fox jumps over the slow brown fox.` Besides by using a reluctant quantifier (see the following box), the problem can be solved by changing the dot to something more specific like `[^ ]` or `[a-z]`. (Having patterns as specific as possible should be the preferred approach when constructing regular expressions anyway.)

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Greedy vs. reluctant quantifiers
>
> Note that the above quantifiers are so-called *greedy*, meaning that they always match *as much as they can*. With time and by getting practice, you will understand the implications of this and the purpose of the non-greedy (reluctant) quantifiers that are also available.
>
> However, if you want to understand it *now* - the problem from the preceding paragraph can be solved by replacing the greedy `*` by a reluctant `*?` quantifier: The pattern `The .*? brown fox` will match only one of the two brown foxes in the sentence. [Test it out!](https://identitiq.localdomain.com/identityiq/rulerunner/rulerunner.jsf?rule=six_beanshellrunner&script=import%20java.util.regex.Pattern%3B%0A%0Amatcher%20%3D%20Pattern.compile(%22The%20.*%3F%20brown%20fox%22).matcher(%22The%20quick%20brown%20fox%20jumps%20over%20the%20slow%20brown%20fox%22)%3B%0Amatcher.find()%3B%0Amatcher.group(0)%3B)

One more quantifier can become handy in certain cases. You will, however, not need it very often:

- A pair of curly braces allows to specify the *exact* or *minimum* or *minimum and maximum* number of matches of the preceding regular expression.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Examples
>
> The regular expression `ab{12}` will match an `a` followed by a sequence of 12 consecutive `b`'s.
>
> The regular expression `ab{12,}` will match an `a` followed by a sequence of at minimum 12 `b`'s.
>
> The regular expression `ab{12,14}` will match an `a` followed by a sequence of 12 to 14 consecutive `b`'s.

# Captures

What we had until here already covers everything you will need for a long time when doing only pattern matching *checks*. However, there is another powerful construct - *captures*: They allow to *extract data* from the input:

- Wrapping part of a regular expression into round parentheses establishes, besides grouping the wrapped parts into a single unit, a *capturing group*.

The captures can be accessed to retrieve what they matched, after the regular expression has been matched, by using the notation `$n`. Here *`n`* is the number of the capturing group. The groups are numbered starting from 1 by counting the opening parentheses (this is significant in case of *nested* capturing groups).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Example
>
> The regular expression `a(b+)c` will match any character sequence starting with `a` and ending with `c` and having one or more `b`'s between *and* will define a capturing group containing all the `b`'s.

The following Java example illustrates the use of captures by reformatting a German date string into ISO format:

```java
System.out.println("13.04.2023".replaceAll("(..).(..).(....)", "$3-$2-$1"));
// prints: 2023-04-13
```

Sidenote: In the above regular expression, we matched the dots in the input using the dot *wildcard*. So while it *appears* that we are checking for the dots, in fact any character will satisfy the match. (We would have to escape the dot with a backslash to have a *literal* match if protection against matching invalid input is required.) Also, by using dots in the capturing groups, we don't check if the capturing groups match *numbers* - any text would match.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> In OrionQL, the *match* and *extract* instructions change their behavior when the regular expression contains captures: Instead of returning/extracting what has been matched by the regular expression, only the part matched by the *last* capture group will go into the result. This allows to anchor the match to preceding and/or following text without having this text included in the result as well.

# Backslashes

While backslashes (`\`) are not a construct on their own, they are so ubiquitous in regular expressions that they deserve a section on their own.

In general, the backslash is used as *escape* character, meaning it changes the meaning if the character that follows it: If the normal meaning of the character is literal it gets a special meaning and vice versa.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Examples
>
> The character `d` normally matches the character `d`. The escaped `\d`, however, matches any digit.
>
> The character `n` normally matches the character `n`. The escaped `\n`, however, matches a linefeed character.
>
> The dot (`.`) normally matches any character. The escaped `\.`, however, matches exactly the dot character.
>
> The opening parenthesis that normally starts a capture group. The escaped `\(`, however, matches an opening parenthesis.

Note that due to the escaping function of the backslash, it has to be escaped by another backslash to be used for itself.

The backslash topic tends to get significantly more confusing when regular expressions are embedded into other languages that also use the backslash as an escape character. This is the case, for instance, for Java or OrionQL. To correctly represent the backslashes in the host language, each of them must be doubled. If there are multiple nested embeddings, this doubling can lead to quite a number of consecutive backslashes for a single original one. But with time you will get used to this.
