
# A Gentle Introduction to CerberusLogic

CerberusLogic provides an easy and compact notation for expressing conditions to be checked on objects. *DSL* stands for *domain specific language* - a mini language specifically suited for some problem domain. (Other DSLs you might already know are *SQL* and *property files*.)

This guide will give an informal introduction to CerberusLogic by using examples. To learn all the details, refer to the [CerberusLogic Reference](/spaces/OCA/pages/218112789/CerberusLogic+Reference).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> While CerberusLogic is designed without this dependency, it is normally used in conjunction with OrionQL to specify the values to check. So, while in this guide we will not use complicated stuff, so you will barely notice there is a DSL, to use CerberusLogic to its full potential, you will need a good understanding of the OrionQL. Refer to the appropriate documentation then if you didn't already.

This is what expects you in this introduction:

- [The basics](#the-basics)
- [Selectors](#selectors)
- [Rule selectors](#rule-selectors)
- [Rule and action identifiers](#rule-and-action-identifiers)
- [Execution modes](#execution-modes)
- [The configuration section](#the-configuration-section)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## The basics

CerberusLogic rules are organized in rule sets. The simplest possible rule set contains of a single rule that accepts *everything*:

```javascript
Rule().accept()
```

An optional semicolon at the end of the rule can be used to make the syntax Java-like:

```javascript
Rule().accept();
...
```

Let's introduce some basic terminology at this point:

- The `Rule()` part in the code above is the *rule header*. It defines the rule and the conditions under which it applies.
- The `.accept()` part in the code above is an *action*. The actions define the decisions that can be taken by the rule. There can be any number of actions chained together into a rule.

Actions can be positive or negative. For both of them an alias has been defined:

|              | Positive decision   | Negative decision   |
|:-------------|:--------------------|:--------------------|
| Primary name | `.accept()`         | `.reject()`         |
| Alias        | `.when()`           | `.fail()`           |

The aliases are intended to facilitate an intuitively understandable rule set notation.

Talking about notation: The identifier used for the rule header need not be `Rule` like in the example above but can be freely chosen by the application to make the notation intuitively understandable. CerberusLogic is entirely agnostic about how the rules are named and requires only that the identifier used starts with a capital letter.

## Selectors

The examples above didn't do anything useful. In reality, of course, rules will have to *check conditions* on the objects given to them. For this they are equipped with *selectors* - expressions that check conditions on objects. Selectors employ a syntax similar to IIQ's Java `Filter` constructs. The following rule will accept only objects having a `type` attribute equal to *ApplicationRole* and reject all other objects. Let's use a different rule header here to make the rule semantics more intuitively understandable:

```javascript
Bundle().accept(
    eq( "type", "ApplicationRole" )
).reject()
```

Note the action *chain* used by this rule - as noted there can be *any* number of actions attached to a rule. BTW, if there were *no* unconditional *reject* action at the end, the rule wouldn't take a decision on any objects that *don't* trigger the *accept* action (that is, have any other or no value for `type`).

Note that CerberusLogic doesn't define what *accepting* or *rejecting*, or *not taking a decision at all* means - this is the obligation of the application code: What CerberusLogic *does* is only to provide a notation for expressing conditions to check on objects - it is fully agnostic to what it is used for. *That* is defined exclusively by the application code using it. CerberusLogic *only* provides an *abstract mechanism* to check conditions on objects. This will get more clear below.

Beyond the `eq()` selector used in the example above, there are a couple of other selectors including collection checks and the composite selectors `and()`, `or()` and `not()`. We won't go into detail about them all here - refer to the [CerberusLogic Reference](/spaces/OCA/pages/218112789/CerberusLogic+Reference) to learn more.

Let's, however, mention the implicit *AND*, *OR* and *NOT* built into CerberusLogic:

- When a rule header or action contains a *list* of selectors, *all* of them need to be fulfilled for the rule to apply respective the action to be triggered (implicit *AND*).
- Selectors that check object attributes commonly accept, instead of *one* value to compare it with, a *list* of values. This will cause a match on *any* of the values fulfil the selector (implicit *OR*).
- For most selectors a negated version exists - for instance the `eq()` (*equals*) selector has an `ne()` (*not equal*) counterpart.

The following example accepts all roles of type *ApplicationRole* or *FunctionalRole* that have no owner and doesn't take a decision otherwise:

```javascript
Bundle().accept(
    eq( "type", "ApplicationRole", "FunctionalRole" ),
    eq( "owner", null )
)
```

With this knowledge, you can already write basic rule sets.

## Rule selectors

Until now we used selectors only in the *action*. However they can also be used in rule headers. In this case they define the applicability of the rule. Let's illustrate this with an example:

```javascript
Bundle( eq( "type", "ApplicationRole" ) ).accept( ... );

Bundle( eq( "type", "FunctionalRole" ) ).accept( ... );
```

Here, the rule set contains two rules, one of which applies to roles of type *ApplicationRole* and the other one to roles of type *FunctionalRole*. Roles of other types don't select any rule, so the rule set will never take a decision on them.

Being able to use selectors on rule level as well as action level allows to

- structure large rule sets (see example above)
- supply different objects on both levels, effectively checking them against each other
- apply a two-step evaluation, having the result of the first step (rule selection) determine if the second step will be tried at all

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note that while it is natural to use rule header selectors and action selectors to check object *pairs*, there is indeed no limit in the number of objects checked against each other in rules when using the DSL together with OrionQL expressions thanks to the parent references provided by them.

Returning to the above example, you could, for instance, use this rule set in an application that checks the entitlements contained in roles to adhere to certain reglements depending on the role type. With the setup shown, you would have one rule for application roles and a separate one for functional roles, and what's checked on the action level are the entitlements contained in the role.

Again, all this is defined by the application that uses CerberusLogic, and the DSL itself makes no assumptions about the meaning of what is encoded in the rules.

## Rule and action identifiers

Rule headers and actions can accept, as an optional first parameter, a string that will be stored as the *rule ID* respective *action ID*. When a decision was made then, these IDs are returned to the application code, giving it additional information about the decision. The application code is free to give these IDs *any semantics* it wants to suit the task at hand. CerberusLogic does not interpret the IDs in any way - it simply stores and returns them.

There are many applications for rule and action IDs, limited only by the imagination of application developer. As a first example let's take a section of the diagnostic rules of the Automatic Reconciliation:

```javascript
// Sort out non-existing entitlements first so they cannot interfere with the selections below
Decision( "reportiam" ).when(
	"Entitlement does not exist",
	eq( "entitlement", null )
);

// Ignore identities out of scope
Decision( "ignore" ).when(
	"Identity out of scope",
	or(
		ne( "identity.identitytype", "employee" ),
		eq( "identity.inactive", true )
	)
);
```

As you can see, the rule set now returns more information about the decision it took to the application code. When in the previous examples the only information the rule set could return was a `Boolean` indicating if the object was accepted or rejected by the rule set, or if *no* decision was taken, this rule set returns more rich information:

- It returns a *named* decision (using the *rule ID* as the decision name)
- and an explanation for the decision (using the *action ID* as the explanation).

The most interesting implication is that this way the rule set can take *different* decisions as opposed to the simple yes/no schema we had before.

As stated, there are many applications for rule and action IDs. We will see some of them below.

## Execution modes

While we didn't explicitly talk about how rule sets are executed, you probably already have an intuitive understanding about what should happen when you give an object to a rule set for check. Let's state the execution schema that was used in the examples so far *explicitly*:

The rule set is examined from top to bottom, for each rule that is applicable (according to its selectors) checking each action for a match of the trigger condition (specified in its selector), and upon the first match returning the decision.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> An intuitive view on rule set execution
>
> To illustrate this schema graphically, you can imagine a rule set as a *cascaded sieve* into which objects are poured in at the top, that sorts out, at each stage, selected objects - passing the remaining ones down the cascade until the bottom of the rule set is reached.

The execution mode just described is called *decision mode*, and in this mode a rule set can return only a *single decision* per object which, is either an *accept* or a *reject*. This mode is used by the application code calling the `approve()` method on the rule set.

To support use cases in which *multiple decisions* need to be taken on an object, rule sets support an alternative execution mode, called *evaluation mode*. To use it, the application code calls the rule set's `evaluate()` method. In this mode, triggering a decision doesn't end rule set evaluation but causes it to continue with the next rule. All decisions made during rule set evaluation are collected and returned at the end as a `Map` containing, for each *rule ID* where there was a decision, the *action ID* that triggered the decision. Only positive decisions are collected, while negative decisions are interpreted as validation errors thrown by the rule set. Validation errors immediately end rule set evaluation with an exception. The `.fail()` action would be a good notation for that.

Evaluation mode can be used, for instance, to collect multiple diagnostics on the objects under check. Let's sketch a short example, checking roles (note the *when* alias being used instead of *accept*):

```javascript
Diagnosis( "owner failure" ).when(
    "Owner not set",
    eq( "owner", null )
 ).when(
    "Owner is inactive",
    eq( "owner.inactive", true )
);

Diagnosis( "entitlements failure" ).when(
    "Role with no entitlements",
    none( ":flatten(flattenedRequirements#profiles#constraints#value)" )
).when(
    "Role referencing nonexisting entitlements",
    any( ... )
);
```

You can add as many diagnoses to the rule set as you want. It is also possible to limit checking for certain diagnoses by e.g. role type using appropriate conditions on the rule headers. Note that while there can be multiple diagnoses per role, each diagnosis can be triggered only once, so the conditions checked first will mask any conditions checked later.

Another use for evaluation mode is computing values from objects according to defined rules. This can be used to compute additional object attributes based on condition checks. The general approach for this would be to use the *rule ID* as the name of the attribute to compute, and the *action ID* to contain the information how the value is to be computed. Let's start with a silly but simple example to demonstrate how this generally looks like:

```javascript
Attribute( "maturity" ).when(
    "junior",
    lt( "age", 25 )
).when(
    "professional",
    lt( "age", 50 )
).when(
    "senior"
);
```

Note the sequence in which the conditions are checked by the rule set execution, ensuring that for the *professional* and *senior* cases the lower age bounds need not be specified.

In this example, the attribute values were encoded directly. This might not always be possible, in which case what is returned by the rule set would have to be interpreted in some way by the application code to compute the effective value. A straightforward approach would be to use the *action ID* as an identifier that will be used by the application code to select the computation method.

There is, however, another option that can be used: Interpreting the *action ID*s as expressions to be evaluated on the object. CerberusLogic offers this directly: If an application chooses to make use of this possibility, the rule set evaluation will interpret the *action ID*s as expressions and store instead of them in the returned `Map` the *evaluation results*.

Having the expressions that compute the attribute value *directly* in the actions makes the rule set self-contained, meaning that there is no need to examine the application code to understand what the rule set *effectively* computes. At the same time it makes the need for changing the application code as a result of rule set evolution less likely.

## The configuration section

Checking objects against some rule set commonly involves the same three steps:

1. Read the objects from some source, mostly a database query.
2. Submit each object to the rule set.
3. Based on the decision results, gather output and direct it to the appropriate receiver(s).

To not write the same code over and over for the same class of tasks, the common functionality can be abstracted into an algorithm that is *parameterized* to adapt it to each *concrete* task. To facilitate this, CerberusLogic offers a configuration section: It permits to encode additional information needed by a generic algorithm for applying a rule set to its target objects.

The configuration section, if present, precedes the rules code and consists of a `config()` construct enclosing a list of *named values*. The values can be scalars, lists or maps (including *nested* maps).

As an example let's assume we need to, for a *number* of object types, perform data checks encoded in rule sets, and address the findings to the appropriate receivers using specific report layouts. (The Automatic Reconciliation is an example for such a task.)

Instead of writing the same type of code for each object type, we will write the algorithm once in a parameterized way, so it will be able to run *any* rule set containing the needed parameters in its configuration section. We might come up with the following configuration section:

```javascript
config(
    objectClass("Bundle"),
    filter("type == \"ApplicationRole\""),
    report(
        columns(
            "ID=name",
            "Name=displayName",
            "Diagnosis=decision",
            "Explanation=explanation"
        ),
        receiver("owner|IAMCC")
    )
);
```

Adding a configuration like this to the *Diagnosis* rule set from above would allow the algorithm to become independent of the objects to be checked. Besides for roles, we could then use it also for checking identities, entitlements, access requests or *whatever* - by only writing an appropriate *rule set*, parameterized as necessary. *Whatever* checks we might come up with in future - the algorithm to run them is already there!

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Of course, depending on the implementation, a rule set configuration section is not the only way to parameterize an algorithm. However, it might be a convenient one.

## Conclusion

In this guide you learned that CerberusLogic provides an *abstract* mechanism and a simple, intuitive notation to be used for a multitude of different tasks that require condition checks on objects, such as but not limited to:

- object validity checks
- object classification
- attribute computations

When confronted with new tasks, watch out for use cases of these types of patterns. Separating the business logic from the technical implementation details will make your implementations at the same time shorter and more powerful, and on the opposite side the business logic will be easier to implement and maintain thanks to using a notation closer to the business domain. (If needed, you can even extend the expressive power that is offered for the business logic notation by injecting your own domain specific constructs into the language, providing an implementation for them in your code. Custom selectors could be an example.)
