
# Object Query Framework Programming Guide

The Object Query Framework consists of a set of classes that provide useful abstractions for database access and processing. This document outlines the functions they provide and how they can be used. For details consult the JavaDocs, and for real-life examples look at the code of the `AutoReconciliationTaskExecutor` and the `six_generic_query`.

- [QueryHelper](#queryhelper)
- [OrionQL](#orionql)
  - [Basic use](#basic-use)
  - [Proxy hierarchies](#proxy-hierarchies)
  - [Caching](#caching)
  - [Lookup tables](#lookup-tables)
  - [Implanting attributes](#implanting-attributes)
- [CerberusLogic](#cerberuslogic)
  - [Basic use](#basic-use)
  - [Evaluation mode](#evaluation-mode)
  - [The configuration section](#the-configuration-section)
  - [Rule set creation using API calls](#rule-set-creation-using-api-calls)
- [TabularData](#tabulardata)
- [IndexedData](#indexeddata)

# QueryHelper

This class is a thin wrapper around the two kinds of `context.search()` methods - the one fetching *IIQ objects* (the variant with with two parameters) and the one directly fetching the objects' attributes, returning them as `Object` arrays (the variant with with three parameters). It can be used without any of the other classes on this page.

The original `context.search()` methods suffer from the following shortcomings:

- The two-parameter method throws an exception if a selected object is deleted from the database while the iteration is running. Even when catching the exception, there is *no way* to advance the iteration any further. So if there is a *chance* that objects get deleted while the iteration is running, this method cannot be used, and explicit object loading must be implemented. (The `WorkItem` and `WorkflowCase` classes are candidates for this.)
- The three-parameter method
  - cannot fetch extended attributes directly if they are not searchable (have no *named column* and no *extended index*)
  - requires cumbersome and error-prone by-hand synchronization between the attribute list used for the query and the indexes used to retrieve the attribute values from the query result

The following method serves as a drop-in replacement for the related two-parameter `context.search()` method:

```java
Iterator<T extends SailPointObject>
QueryHelper.search(PersistenceManager context, Class<T extends SailPointObject> objectClass, QueryOptions queryOptions)
```

It silently skips objects that have been deleted from the database - just as you would handle the problem in code when doing it manually.

The `iterate()` method used internally by this method can also be used directly. It iterates over a list of object IDs given to it, silently skipping the objects that have been deleted from the database.

The following methods can be used instead of the related three-parameter `context.search()` methods:

```java
Iterator<Map<String, Object>>
QueryHelper.search(PersistenceManager context, Class<T extends SailPointObject> objectClass, QueryOptions queryOptions, String attributes)

Iterator<Map<String, Object>>
QueryHelper.search(PersistenceManager context, Class<T extends SailPointObject> objectClass, QueryOptions queryOptions, List<String> attributes)
```

Instead of `Object` arrays, the iterators these methods return yield the records with the requested attributes as a `Map` objects. In addition, they allow to transparently fetch extended attributes as well - just as if they were normal attributes. The `QueryHelper` does this by using Java introspection and consulting the class's `ObjectConfig` to determine which attributes must be fetched via the `attributes` mapping.

Both methods eventually call a third `search` method taking two separate attribute lists for the different access methods. This method can also be called directly if there is a need to not rely on the built-in algorithm.

# OrionQL

This class implements the OrionQL mini language.

## Basic use

To apply OrionQL expressions to an object, all what is needed is to wrap it into an OrionQL Proxy using the static method `OrionQL.wrap()`:

```java
var role = context.getObject(Bundle.class, "Role596");
var proxy = OrionQL.wrap(role, context);
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> There is a second variant of the `wrap()` method that allows to provide a macro library and an environment map.

After that, the proxy's `access()` and `format()` methods can be used to evaluate OrionQL expressions on the object or to apply formatting templates to it:

```java
String roleManagerEmail = proxy.access("role_manager:Identity({email})");
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> DSL-enabling your code
>
> You mostly won't however, like here, embed DSL code *literally* into your code - other than maybe for quickly generating some debug output or similar purposes.
>
> *DSL-enabling* an application means to - instead of writing code for a *specific* task (e.g. generating a data extract) - abstract a *whole class* of tasks (e.g. *extracting data*) into a *generic* algorithm that is *parameterized* for each concrete task by supplying it some DSL code to control the concrete behavior (e.g. column definitions). Observe that this is similar to *configuration* - you have this done multiple times already. However, it is configuration on a higher level due to a DSL often having more expressive power than most configuration languages.
>
> To be honest, by using property files or configuration tables, you already *have used* domain specific notations, albeit very simple ones. Maybe, you have even defined some configuration syntax on top of JSON - then you have already created a DSL (probably without even noticing). At the end, it's only a *quantitative* step from simple configuration to more capable DSLs.
>
> However, as blurry as this transition might be, parameterizing an algorithm with *behavior* that can be *flexibly specified* takes it to a new abstraction level. It is similar to the higher order functions known from functional programming or Java functions taking lambdas as parameter. Both techniques free programmers from writing the same code over and over, but when you do this on *application level*, you get something like a *higher order application*.
>
> And that's very powerful. It will not only free you from boring repetitive work by needing to write the technical implementation only *once*. It will also make your code better since less code means more time to improve it, and it will make your users happier because they will see their future requirements already served (or quick to implement). And, by separating the business logic from the technical plumbing, at the same time giving it an optimized notation will make it easier to write and maintain.

More often than not however, it won't be *your own* code that will execute the DSL code. Instead, you will submit the wrapped objects to DSL-enabled *components*. See the `TabularData` and `IndexedData` sections below for examples. What is left to your code to DSL-enable it then is wrapping the objects it handles.

## Proxy hierarchies

As in most applications there is not only a *single* object to be processed but objects are processed in loops, an additional aspect comes in: Compiling OrionQL expressions repeatedly would be a waste of computing power. So, what is needed is to reuse the compiled expressions for *all* the objects processed by a loop. This can be done by *explicitly* compiling the expressions in advance using `OrionQL.compile()`, and within the loop *reusing* the precompiled expression by submitting the proxied objects to its `access()` method. Another approach is to have the proxies *share* the compiled expressions using a common cache. We won't elaborate on the first approach - you can easily look up how to do this by searching for uses of the `OrionQL.Accessor` class - but having the proxies share a common compilation cache is easily achieved by connecting them. This is where proxy hierarchies come in.

There is, however, an even more important aspect of proxy hierarchies: They reflect parent-child relationships between objects to allow them to be navigated back from the child objects using OrionQL *parent references* (`^`).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> What establishes a parent-child relationship?
>
> In the context of OrionQL, we are *not* interested in the object model *linear* parent-child relationships (e.g. object → name), but only in *to-many* relationships. The reason is that navigating back a *linear* chain is always possible using the `this` reference (@). So, in OrionQL, parent-child relationships are *exclusively* established by *iterations*: The object from which the collection iterated upon was retrieved by a *linear* access chain is the parent of the collection elements. (Thus, in most cases the parent is *not* the collection containing the elements *itself* but the object that *owns* this collection!)
>
> In this sense, OrionQL's notion of parent-child relationships doesn't truly reflect the *object model* but is rather a representation of the *iteration path* that led to the current object. This will get more clear when looking at the technical details.

Establishing a parent-child relationship is done by *deriving* the proxy of the child object from that of the parent object through an invocation of the parent proxy's `derive()` method with the child object as payload. As explained in the box above, parent-child relationships are established by iterations only.

Using this schema, the proxies of all objects processed by the program are connected into a *tree* reflecting the *nested iteration* these objects are part of.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Since at any time the nested iteration is at exactly *one* object, in practice there is never really a *tree* but only a *chain* from the root to the current object with all side branches of the tree removed. However, imagining the proxies to form a tree corresponding to the object tree the nested iteration walks, is more illustrative.

This schema implies that there will always be exactly *one* proxy that is created by the `wrap()` method - the parent proxy used by the root iteration. It wraps the `null` object since the root iteration has *no* parent object. This leads to the following general rule objects are handled by OrionQL-enabled code:

Starting from the root proxy that wraps the `null` object, every iteration derives the proxies for the iterated upon objects from its parent proxy - the one from which the collection iterated upon was retrieved.

In code, this pattern looks like follows:

```java
var rootProxy = OrionQL.wrap(null, context);
...
while ...
{
    ...
    var proxy = rootProxy.derive(resultSet.next());
    ...
    var childCollection = ...
    for (var child: childCollection)
    {
        var childProxy = proxy.derive(child);
        ...
    }
}
```

Besides sharing a common compilation cache and tracking object relationships like described above, proxy hierarchies have another important aspect: They share a common data cache and application provided lookup tables. We will look at this in the following sections.

## Caching

To ensure the best possible performance, OrionQL extensively uses caching. There is even a *cache* instruction that can be used explicitly in expressions to cache values to not have them computed repeatedly. The cache is shared by all proxies in a proxy hierarchy, and different proxy hierarchies have different caches. This way, the entire cache handling is automatic and generally doesn't need explicit control: The cache lives only as long as the proxy hierarchy it belongs to, which is normally the lifetime of the root proxy of the query or program run. It is discarded after that, so each new query or program run gets a fresh cache. This way, application code does never need to worry about stale data or cache invalidation.

As always, mechanisms that are out of sight may cause unwanted side effects, so despite that there is normally no reason to worry about caching, developers should be aware of what is going on behind the scenes.

To provide explicit control, OrionQL also provides a method to application code for clearing the cache when there is a need to do so - for instance to free memory or to refresh data (`Proxy.clearCache()`).

## Lookup tables

Application provided lookup tables are key-value mappings that application code can attach under a chosen *lookup name* to a proxy hierarchy to make them available to OrionQL code for use in lookup instructions. They commonly serve to translate values or provide other application specific or prefetched data. Lookup instructions are described in the [OrionQL Reference](/spaces/OCA/pages/218112785/OrionQL+Reference).

## Implanting attributes

The last aspect of OrionQL proxies to cover are *implanted attributes*.

Application code is permitted to implant named values into proxies that will appear to DSL code like attributes of the proxied objects, thereby even hiding attributes with the same name. For implanting attributes, the following proxy method is used:

```java
Proxy<T>
implant(String attributeName, Object value)
```

This mechanism allows application code to attach additional data to an object before it is given to DSL code. The Automatic Reconciliation, for instance, attaches, before submitting an *additional entitlement* object into processing, to it the entitlement it references and a list of roles that would grant this entitlement, as well as some other data. This allows to use this information when processing the additional entitlement (in particular the diagnostic rules and report generation).

# CerberusLogic

This class implements the CerberusLogic mini language. CerberusLogic provides a syntax and an abstract execution engine for rules that check conditions on objects. As this, it is fully agnostic about any concrete application, providing only an abstract mechanism to check conditions on objects. It is up to the application code to provide a meaning to the rules expressed in an CerberusLogic rule set.

Conditions are checked by evaluating expressions on the objects under check. The expressions are fully opaque to CerberusLogic, being represented in the rules as strings and handed over by CerberusLogic back to the application for evaluation. Commonly, the application will use OrionQL as expression language, so there is nothing to implement except wrapping the objects into OrionQL proxies before handing them over to the rule set.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> CerberusLogic is an *embedded* DSL, using Beanshell as host language. Consequently, it uses a subset of the Java syntax and doesn't need a dedicated parser - instead, the DSL code is executed using the Beanshell interpreter after setting up a special execution environment that results in the Beanshell execution building a `RuleSet` object that is the compiled version of the rule set DSL code.

## Basic use

Using CerberusLogic starts with compiling the DSL code into a `RuleSet`:

```java
String ruleText = ...
var ruleSet = CerberusLogic.compile(ruleText, null);
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> There is a second variant of the `compile()` method that allows to provide a macro library.

The second method parameter allows to require a specific identifier to be used for the rule headers. If none is specified, any identifier will be accepted. CerberusLogic is generally agnostic to the identifier, requiring only that it starts with a capital letter. It is normally chosen in a way that facilitates an intuitive understanding of the rules' semantics.

After compiling, the `RuleSet` can be applied to objects. This is a two-step process:

1. In the first step, which is only needed if the application uses rule selection, the rules applicable according to the rule header selectors are selected. This returns a new `RuleSet` that will be used for the second step or `null` if no rules have been selected.
2. In the second step, the `RuleSet` from step 1 is executed, either asking it for a decision (`approve()`) or evaluating the rules (`evaluate()`) - see the explanations below.

Both steps take as input an object to which the rule header selectors (step 1) or the action selectors (step 2) are applied. The application logic determines which objects to submit, and particularly if it's the same object for both steps or different objects are submitted to each of them.

The objects given to the `RuleSet` must implement the `IAccessor` interface defined by CerberusLogic, what is normally achieved by wrapping the objects into an OrionQL proxy. This allows OrionQL expressions to be used in the rules, however an application is free to implement and use a different expression evaluation mechanism.

In code, using a `RuleSet` compiled from DSL code as shown above boils down to the following general pattern, in the example *deciding* on objects (as opposed to *evaluation mode*, see next section):

```java
var primaryObject = ...
var selectedRules = ruleSet.select(primaryObject);
if (selectedRules != null)
{
    ...
    var secondaryObject = ...
    var decision = selectedRules.approve(secondaryObject);
    if ((decision != null) && decision.isAccept)
    {
        // object was accepted
        ...
    }
}
```

Depending on the application logic, you might want to implement `else` cases for one or both of the `if` statements to react on the the primary object not selecting any rule or the the rule set not making a decision. The above code shows only the *minimum* logic, reacting on objects *accepted* by the rule set and interpreting everything else as the object *not* having been accepted. (Note that when the check fails already on the rule header level, the secondary object might not be computed at all, and if there were several of these, none of them would be accepted.)

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Parent relationships
>
> When using CerberusLogic in combination with OrionQL, be sure to follow the guidelines about proxy hierarchies outlined in the respective section above. In particular, having the primary objects reachable from the secondary objects via parent references permits checking them against each other in selectors.

## Evaluation mode

If, instead of using the rule set in decision mode as shown above, it is used in evaluation mode, the code that uses `selectedRules` changes into the following:

```java
var results = selectedRules.evaluate(secondaryObject, false);
```

The method call returns a `Map` (possibly empty) containing an entry for each rule for which an action was triggered. With the second parameter set to `false` like in the code above, it will map the *rule ID* to the *action ID* of the triggered action. If the second parameter is `true`, the *action ID* is interpreted as an expression, and the result of evaluating that expression on the target object is stored in the map instead of the *action ID*.

In evaluation mode, negative decisions are used to report a validation failure detected by the rule set and thus cause exceptions to be thrown. This corresponds to the CerberusLogic `fail()` action alias.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note that the same rule set cannot *practically* be used in *both* decision *and* evaluation mode since the planned evaluation scheme determines the semantics of the rule set and how it has to be written. As this is purely an application level decision, CerberusLogic is fully indifferent about this.

## The configuration section

Rule sets may contain a configuration section that application code can use freely for its purposes and that is not in any way used or interpreted by CerberusLogic itself.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> There is one exception to this: The configuration parameter `ruleTag` is interpreted as the identifier to be used for the rule headers *if none was specified when compiling the rule set*. This works in two directions:
>
> 1. If the rule set's configuration section *contains* a `ruleTag` directive, the rule set is required to also *use* this value as the rule headers.
> 2. If the rule set's configuration section *does not* contain a `ruleTag` directive, the identifier used by the rule set as the rule headers is added as `ruleTag` configuration parameter to the returned configuration.
>
> This means that whenever an application does not require the rule set to use a specific identifier when compiling it, it can query the identifier used by the rule set from the compiled `RuleSet`'s configuration map as `ruleTag`. In the opposite case, the `ruleTag` configuration parameter is not used by CerberusLogic, so it can be used as a normal configuration parameter (however, this is not recommended).

The configuration can be queried from the compiled `RuleSet` by calling `getConfig()`:

```java
var config = ruleSet.getConfig();
```

The method returns a `Map` that contains the configuration values as key-value pairs. The values can be of scalar types, lists or - possibly *nested* - maps. It's exclusively the application that defines the configuration options it intends to offer (that is, *recognize*) in the rule set's configuration section. CerberusLogic is fully agnostic to these details and will simply fill the config map with whatever has been coded in the rule set's configuration section.

## Rule set creation using API calls

As CerberusLogic is, at the core, a *business rules evaluation engine*, that is *configured* using a notation called *CerberusLogic*, it is generally possible to also use it *without* its *DSL* part when instead building the `RuleSet`s programmatically through the API. This allows to use alternative representations for the business rules that may be better suited to how these rules will be maintained than CerberusLogic code: Examples are input forms, XML, JSON, CSV or any other representation suiting the intended purpose (btw. at the same time defining a *specialized business rules notation* - effectively *another* DSL).

As an example, assume we have a representation for some business rules that, if they were expressed in CerberusLogic, would look like this:

```javascript
Criterion( "CRO-1" )
  .when( "Access to Role878",
    any( "assignedRoles", eq( "name", "Role878" ) )
  )

Criterion( "CRO-2" )
  .when( "Access to Role966",
    any( "assignedRoles", eq( "name", "Role966" ) )
  )
  .when( "Access to mass CID",
    any( "assignedRoles", eq( "sixCIDAccess", "true" ) )
  )
```

In XML, for instance, the representation could be the following:

```xml
<List>
	<Map>
		<entry key="criteria_id" value="CRO-1"/>
		<entry key="selectors">
			<value>
				<List>
					<Map>
						<entry key="description" value="Access to Role878"/>
						<entry key="assignedRoles">
							<value>
								<List>
									<Map>
										<entry key="name" value="Role878"/>
									</Map>
								</List>
							</value>
						</entry>
					</Map>
				</List>
			</value>
		</entry>
	</Map>
	<Map>
		<entry key="criteria_id" value="CRO-2"/>
		<entry key="selectors">
			<value>
				<List>
					<Map>
						<entry key="description" value="Access to Role966"/>
						<entry key="assignedRoles">
							<value>
								<List>
									<Map>
										<entry key="name" value="Role966"/>
									</Map>
								</List>
							</value>
						</entry>
					</Map>
					<Map>
						<entry key="description" value="Access to mass CID"/>
						<entry key="assignedRoles">
							<value>
								<List>
									<Map>
										<entry key="sixCIDAccess" value="true"/>
									</Map>
								</List>
							</value>
						</entry>
					</Map>
				</List>
			</value>
		</entry>
	</Map>
</List>
```

Using the CerberusLogic API, the code building the `RuleSet` then would perform, based on this input, actions equivalent to the following code:

```java
import com.six.iam.util.CerberusLogic.RuleSet;
import static com.six.iam.util.CerberusLogic.Selector.*;

var ruleSet = new RuleSet();

ruleSet.addRule("CRO-1")
    .when("Access to Role878",
        any( "assignedRoles", eq( "name", "Role878" ) )
    );

ruleSet.addRule("CRO-2")
     .when("Access to Role966",
         any( "assignedRoles", eq( "name", "Role966" ) )
     )
     .when("Access to mass CID",
         any( "assignedRoles", eq( "sixCIDAccess", "true" ) )
     );
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Instead of invoking eq(), any() etc., it might be more convenient to construct selectors using the generic method `construct(String name, Object... args)`.

This not by accident looks suspiciously like the initial CerberusLogic code, and of course there probably wouldn't ever be a reason to code a `RuleSet` this way *literally* in Java (except in unit tests). This code was shown here *only* to illustrate what *effective* Java code executions the real code would need to perform when compiling an alternative business rules representation into a `RuleSet`.

# TabularData

This class is used to derive columnar data from objects given to it and is primarily used for generating CSV and tabular HTML output. Some primitive methods can be used directly, but to use the full functionality, OrionQL is required.

A `TabularData` object is instantiated with a list of column definitions as known from the Generic Query, having one of the following forms. The expressions will be used to retrieve the requested data from the objects fed into this instance:

*expression  
caption*=*expression  
caption*=

The first two variants are equivalent, differing only in the first one using *expression* as the column caption, what is often convenient if the expressions are simple. The last variant generates an empty column.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> By calling `setHorizontalLayout()`, the class can be requested to create the output in an alternative format with the columns laid out horizontally as rows and the records represented as columns.

After specifying an output stream or file, the `TabularData` instance can be used for generating output. While the lower-level methods can also be used if more control is needed, the normal way to generate a CSV file or HTML table in one step is supplying a result set represented by an *Iterator* using a single method call (generating the CSV header, if needed, requires a separate method call). For every output type, there are two methods - for iterators yielding objects already *wrapped* into OrionQL proxies and iterators yielding *plain* objects - the iterator *itself* is then expected wrapped into a proxy:

|                               | CSV output                                                                | HTML output                                                                     |
|:------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Input objects already wrapped | <br/>```<br/>void writeCsv(Iterator<OrionQL.Proxy<T>> input)<br/>```<br/> | <br/>```<br/>void writeHtmlTable(Iterator<OrionQL.Proxy<T>> input)<br/>```<br/> |
| Plain input objects           | <br/>```<br/>void writeCsv(OrionQL.Proxy<Iterator<T>> input)<br/>```<br/> | <br/>```<br/>void writeHtmlTable(OrionQL.Proxy<Iterator<T>> input)<br/>```<br/> |

The following example code shows how to export all assigned roles into an in-memory CSV file:

```java
var queryOptions = new QueryOptions(new Filter[]{Filter.notnull("assignedRoles.name")});
var resultSet = QueryHelper.search(context, Identity.class, queryOptions, "name, assignedRoles.name");
var output = new ByteArrayOutputStream();
var writer = new TabularData(List.of("name", "role=assignedRoles\\.name"), false);
writer.setOutputStream(output, "Windows-1251");
writer.writeCsvHeader(null, false);
writer.writeCsv(OrionQL.wrap(resultSet, context));
```

It produces about 5 MB of CSV in roughly 5 seconds:

```
name,role
"usrxy","Role704"
"usrxy","Role501"
"usrxy","Role069"
"usrxy","Role250"
"usrxy","Roleabc"
"usrxy","Rolexyz"
...
```

# IndexedData

This class is used to build single- or multilevel mappings from counting, grouping or indexing objects using specified criteria, and to retrieve data from such mappings. There are also some methods to process such mappings in certain ways.

The low level static methods for working with object mappings can be used directly, but for the high-level functionality, OrionQL is required.

In the standard case, an `IndexedData` object is instantiated by giving it the target mapping (a `Map`) and a list of OrionQL expressions defining the indexing criteria. After that, objects can be handed to it for putting them into the mapping or to retrieve from the mapping the data they reference. For the *put type* methods, variants taking an iterator are also provided, so an entire result set can be processed in a single call. The following table lists the available methods:

|                     | low level static method                                                                                                                               | high level method\*\*\*                                      | iterator method                                                                                                       |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| object counting     | <br/>```<br/>count(Map<K, Object> root, K... keys)<br/>```<br/>                                                                                       | <br/>```<br/>count(OrionQL.Proxy<T> object)<br/>```<br/>     | <br/>```<br/>countAll(Iterator<OrionQL.Proxy<T>> input) countAll(OrionQL.Proxy<Iterator<T>> input)<br/>```<br/>       |
| object grouping     | <br/>```<br/>add(Map<K, Object> root, V value, K... keys)*<br/>```<br/>                                                                               | <br/>```<br/>add(OrionQL.Proxy<T> object)*<br/>```<br/>      | <br/>```<br/>addAll(Iterator<OrionQL.Proxy<T>> input) addAll(OrionQL.Proxy<Iterator<T>> input)<br/>```<br/>           |
| object indexing\*\* | <br/>```<br/>V put(Map<K, Object> root, V value, K... keys)****<br/>```<br/>                                                                          | <br/>```<br/>V put(OrionQL.Proxy<T> object)****<br/>```<br/> | <br/>```<br/>putAll(Iterator<OrionQL.Proxy<T>> input)***** putAll(OrionQL.Proxy<Iterator<T>> input)*****<br/>```<br/> |
| data retrieval\*\*  | <br/>```<br/>V get(Map<K, Object> root, K... keys)**** V computeIfAbsent(Map<K, Object> root, Function<K, V> initializer, K... keys)****<br/>```<br/> | <br/>```<br/>V get(OrionQL.Proxy<T> object)****<br/>```<br/> | n/a                                                                                                                   |

\* There is a variant allowing to specify the bucket constructor, respective it can be set on the instance by `useCollection()`, so for instance to suppress duplicates, `HashSet` can be used instead of the default `ArrayList`.  
\*\* These methods correspond to the `Map` methods of the same name, generalizing them for multilevel mappings.  
\*\*\* What will be added to the mapping - and returned by `put` on key collisions - depends on the IndexedData's `useMapper()` setting. If no mapper is set, it will be the proxy, otherwise the value returned by applying the mapper to it.  
\*\*\*\* Autocast to the expected type (convenience function). May cause ClassCastException if used improperly.  
\*\*\*\*\* Key collisions will cause an exception to be thrown.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Playing with these methods to gain a better understanding of how they work is possible using the Generic Query: Its grouping feature uses `count()` and `add()`, and OrionQL expressions offer *count* (countAll), *group* (addAll), *index* (putAll) and *get* instructions.

The following methods provide additional functionality for working with multilevel mappings. Except for `overlay()`, each static method is complemented by a nonstatic counterpart that operates on the `IndexedData` instance's mapping.

| function                                                                                                     | method                                      |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------|
| Pretty-print a multilevel mapping                                                                            | <br/>```<br/>String pprint()<br/>```<br/>   |
| Create a tabular representation of a multilevel mapping using the two topmost levels as the rows and columns | <br/>```<br/>writeHtmlMatrix()<br/>```<br/> |
| Recursively merge a source mapping into a target mapping                                                     | <br/>```<br/>overlay()<br/>```<br/>         |

The `IndexedData` class can be used to count or group objects - for instance to have a lengthy computation collect error statistics, or collect messages to address them each receiver in only *one* message. Another important use is building in-memory lookup tables to speed up processing. The following example code shows how to use `IndexedData` to build a lookup table for entitlements, indexing them by application name, attribute name and entitlement name. The `IndexedData` instance is thrown away after the lookup table was built. It takes about 4 minutes to run this code:

```java
var entitlements = new IndexedData<String, ManagedAttribute>(
		new HashMap<>(),
		List.of("application.name", "attribute", "value"),
		false
).useMapper(
        OrionQL.Proxy::unwrap
).putAll(
        OrionQL.wrap(context.search(ManagedAttribute.class, null), context)
).get();
```

This lookup table can then be used to retrieve the entitlement referenced by an `IdentityEntitlement` object (wrapped into a proxy) like follows:

```java
var entitlementsIndex = new IndexedData<String, IdentityEntitlement>(entitlements, List.of("appName", "name", "value"), false);
...
ManagedAttribute entitlement = entitlementsIndex.get(identityEntitlement);
```
