
# The Generic Query

The Generic Query, available directly in the SIX IAM Web GUI, is the Swiss Army knife of the IIQ operator concerning investigations of various kinds. It is a flexible data query and analysis tool based on the IIQ object model ([Reference](https://identitiq.localdomain.com/identityiq/doc/javadoc/index.html)) and the [Object Query Framework](/spaces/OCA/pages/218112771/Object+Query+Framework+Guide), particularly OrionQL ([Reference](/spaces/OCA/pages/218112785/OrionQL+Reference)) and CerberusLogic ([Reference](/spaces/OCA/pages/218112789/CerberusLogic+Reference)), and offers powerful query and data transformation capabilities that are not available in plain SQL.

In addition to being used as a query tool, the interactive playground the Generic Query offers makes it a great learning tool - not only for the two DSLs but also for the IIQ object model itself and the rather hidden IIQ internals. It can also be used to debug DSL code used in other SIX IAM components like the [Automatic Reconciliation](/spaces/OCA/pages/218112753/Automatic+Reconciliation+Usage+and+Configuration+Guide).

While simple queries can easily be done *without* any knowledge of the DSLs and with only basic knowledge of the IIQ object model, to unleash the full power of the Generic Query, a good understanding of the two DSLs as well as the IIQ object model will be beneficial. However you can start from zero and grow incrementally, using the Generic Query as a learning tool and referring to the three reference documents linked above. After having done your first steps, it will be probably advantageous to read the two introductory articles for the DSLs, [A Gentle Introduction to OrionQL Expressions](/spaces/OCA/pages/218112777/A+Gentle+Introduction+to+OrionQL+Expressions) and [A Gentle Introduction to CerberusLogic](/spaces/OCA/pages/218135343/A+Gentle+Introduction+to+CerberusLogic) to get familiar with the possibilities they offer. Mastering the Generic Query will let you work wonders!

To access the Generic Query, on any SIX IAM instance go to /identityiq/rulerunner/rulerunner.jsf?rule=six\_generic\_query. As there is currently no authorization concept, the access will require administrator rights. From this page you can create a browser bookmark by submitting the empty form (ignoring the resulting error message) and then dragging the link that appeared to the right of the *Execute* button to your browser bookmarks. (This bookmark is actually a [Bookmarklet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bookmarklet) and will work for all SIX IAM instances by taking the host from the current page and opening the contained path in a new browser tab.)

Here is your reading list to become a Generic Query pro:

- [A Gentle Introduction to the Generic Query](/spaces/OCA/pages/268671835/A+Gentle+Introduction+to+the+Generic+Query)
- [Best practices for using the Generic Query](/spaces/OCA/pages/269131647/Best+practices+for+using+the+Generic+Query)
- [Generic Query Reference](/spaces/OCA/pages/269125092/Generic+Query+Reference)
- [Prefabricated queries](/spaces/OCA/pages/269132414/Prefabricated+queries)
- [Query patterns](/spaces/OCA/pages/269131655/Query+patterns)
- [Table Transformer Test Page](/spaces/OCA/pages/293157904/Table+Transformer+Test+Page)
