
# A Gentle Introduction to OrionQL Expressions

The following guide will provide a step by step introduction into the OrionQL mini language - a language for expressing queries on IIQ objects. It will, however, not explain *every* construct it offers - please refer to the reference manual to get the full picture.

OrionQL is a *domain specific language* - a language crafted and specifically suited for a specific problem domain as opposed to a general purpose language serving different problem domains using a domain-*unspecific* notation. It doesn't come to mind immediately but whenever a notation is invented to specifically serve a well-defined problem domain, it is a DSL. Two common examples are property files and SQL.

OrionQL expressions allow queries on IIQ objects as simple as attribute accesses as well as complex object navigations, data transformations and database queries. Besides being used in the [Generic Query](/spaces/OCA/pages/268671184/The+Generic+Query), one of their uses is in CerberusLogic rules to provide the values to the checking selectors, but there are many other uses in contexts like defining tabular data or data aggregations.

You might be intimidated by looking at complex examples like the one provided in [A Heavyweight Example](/spaces/OCA/pages/218120051/A+Heavyweight+Example) for the first time. But don't get frightened - the syntax of OrionQL expressions is indeed quite simple and easy to learn, and you will get to use more and more advanced features as you get acquainted over time. You won't get away without knowledge of the [IIQ object model](https://identitiq.localdomain.com/identityiq/doc/javadoc/index.html) however, nor will complex tasks turn into easy ones. What the language nevertheless *does* for you, is providing a notation that is as close as possible to the problem you are solving, avoiding any complexity *not* inherent to the problem. It aims to express the mere business essence of your solution with minimal technical overhead.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Functional programming at its best
>
> Even more - OrionQL is not only powerful, it's *fun*! Functional programming enthusiasts will immediately realize that it's functional programming *applied*: Expressions are *functions*, computing some output from the input given to them. And they can be combined into larger expressions - something known as *function composition* - by simply stuffing them together into a transformation pipeline. There are even higher-order functions - expressions that take other expressions as parameters. Since in OrionQL everything is an expression (a *function*) the combination possibilities are virtually endless, and you can easily create arbitrarily powerful transformations from a few simple building blocks.

For convenience, in the following text we will refer to ObjectQueryDLS expressions as *attribute expressions* or simply *expressions*. The term *attribute* here is meant as a generalization of what is commonly seen as an object attribute in that it can denote *anything that can be computed off an object*. For a role, the entitlements it grants or the identities it is assigned to would perfectly qualify as attributes although there are no getters for them in the IIQ API - while similar cases *are* covered by getters (for instance, the workgroup memberships of an identity). To provide an example that you will probably understand intuitively at this point, here is the expression for an *identity attribute* containing the list of all assigned roles' names:

```
assignedRoles:map(name)
```

You might have noted the syntactic recursion in the expression above: The `:map()` instruction takes a parameter that is again an expression to apply it to every element of the original collection.

While OrionQL expressions are simply text that could even be provided by an end user input form, they are often embedded into a host language as String literals. In this guide, however, unless stated differently, all expressions will be written as plain OrionQL *without* any of the quoting needed by a host language. (As any Java developer knows, in case of Java/Beanshell/CerberusLogic the quoting rules for String literals require to prepend double quotes and backslashes with a backslash, and newlines need to be represented by `\n` escape sequences since a String literal must be contained on a single line.) The quoting, however, *will* be present in examples where OrionQL expressions are embedded in OrionQL code.

Let's start!

- [The simplest case](#the-simplest-case)
- [Object navigation](#object-navigation)
  - [A word about escaping](#a-word-about-escaping)
- [Resolving object references](#resolving-object-references)
  - [Using Sailpoint Filter expressions](#using-sailpoint-filter-expressions)
  - [This looks like we could do even more with it!](#this-looks-like-we-could-do-even-more-with-it)
    - [Filtering on name or ID again](#filtering-on-name-or-id-again)
    - [What if I need only the newest object?](#what-if-i-need-only-the-newest-object)
  - [What about fetching attributes directly?](#what-about-fetching-attributes-directly)
    - [Fetching attributes of child objects directly](#fetching-attributes-of-child-objects-directly)
  - [A word about caching](#a-word-about-caching)
- [Application defined lookup tables](#application-defined-lookup-tables)
- [Value transformations](#value-transformations)
  - [I have a collection of ... but I need a collection of ...](#i-have-a-collection-of-but-i-need-a-collection-of)
    - [What is a collection?](#what-is-a-collection)
  - [Turning a List into a String](#turning-a-list-into-a-string)
  - [Regular expressions don's scare you, do they?](#regular-expressions-don-s-scare-you-do-they)
    - [I need to get the user ID out of this message](#i-need-to-get-the-user-id-out-of-this-message)
    - [I have a comma separated list of AuditEvent IDs but I need the events themselves](#i-have-a-comma-separated-list-of-auditevent-ids-but-i-need-the-events-themselves)
    - [I need to clean up messages from contained variable information to be able to count them](#i-need-to-clean-up-messages-from-contained-variable-information-to-be-able-to-count-them)
- [Object formatting](#object-formatting)
  - [The :format() instruction](#the-format-instruction)
  - [Formatting templates](#formatting-templates)
  - [Placeholder parameters](#placeholder-parameters)
- [The this reference](#the-this-reference)
- [Parent references](#parent-references)
- [The objects I need are spread over a whole hierarchy of objects!](#the-objects-i-need-are-spread-over-a-whole-hierarchy-of-objects)
- [How to not recompute the same stuff repeatedly](#how-to-not-recompute-the-same-stuff-repeatedly)
- [A layer on top](#a-layer-on-top)

# The simplest case

In its simplest form an expression is an attribute name:

```
firstname
```

When applied to an object, this expression will return its attribute `firstname`. The Java equivalent of this is calling the object method `getFirstname()`.

Besides regular attributes, extended attributes can be accessed in the same way:

```
deputy_id
```

The Java equivalent of this is calling `getAttribute("deputy_id")`. OrionQL will distinguish between regular and extended attributes automatically.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> How does it do this?
>
> It uses the Java reflection API: If the object class provides a getter method for the attribute, it is used. If no getter method exists but the method `getAttribute()`, this one is used instead. Failing both, an error will be raised. Note however, that for most object classes a misspelled attribute will *not* raise an error but is silently interpreted as extended attribute and thus returned as `null`. Checking the names of extended attributes against the *ObjectConfig* is not done because it would be feasible only for very few types.

If the object from which the attribute is queried is a `Map`, the attribute access is interpreted as a Map access, and a `get()` operation is performed. So, the expression

```
requester
```

will call `get("requester")`. You will see examples of this later.

# Object navigation

An object attribute may contain another object. In this case, you can continue accessing attributes, now of *this* object. You do this in the usual way by connecting the attribute names by dots:

```
manager.displayName
```

This gets, not surprisingly, the `displayName` of the object's (expected to be an `Identity`) `manager`.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> About null values
>
> The above example is only roughly equivalent to `getManager().getDisplayName()`. If you wrote this code in Java you had a good chance of producing a `NullPointerException`. OrionQL automatically checks for `null` at any stage and will return `null` immediately. (This means that if `manager.displayName` evaluates to `null`, either the identity has no manager or the manager has no displayName.)

Using the dot notation, arbitrary object chains can be navigated (also known as *to-one* relationships). The following expression will retrieve the requester from a `WorkflowCase`:

```
workflow.variables.requester
```

## A word about escaping

When looking at the last example, you might have asked yourself what to do if the attribute name contains a dot. For instance, IIQ maintains in the attributes maps of `TaskDefinition` objects (accessed as `arguments`) a number of values with names containing dots. To prevent the dots to be interpreted as an attribute path separator, they have to be escaped by backslashes:

```
arguments.TaskDefinition\.runLengthAverage
```

In the same way *any* characters that would otherwise be interpreted as part of the DSL syntax can be escaped.

# Resolving object references

So, we can navigate object chains using the IIQ API. There are, however, a number of cases where the IIQ API doesn't give direct access to the linked object. Instead it provides only its name or ID. The rationale for this design is decoupling. For instance, objects of type `AuditEvent` or `IdentityRequest` do not reference their target objects directly but provide only their ID. This allows the referenced objects do be deleted without affecting the referencing objects.

To turn a name or ID into the referenced object, simply follow it with the object class after a colon:

```
targetId:Identity
```

This will invoke `context.getObject()` using the object's `targetId` as input.

As this is a processing executed after the attribute retrieval, the constructs starting with a colon historically were called *postprocessing instructions*. As you will soon see, there are more of them, and the term *transformations* would probably more appropriately describe their function.

## Using Sailpoint Filter expressions

There are object classes for which the above method of loading by name or ID does not work. The most prominent example is `ManagedAttribute` - objects of this class have no name and are referenced using a combination of three values: application name, attribute name and value.

To execute such complex queries, Sailpoint Filter expressions need to be used. We build them using a templating mechanism.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Formatting Templates
>
> OrionQL provides a simple mechanism to compose strings containing one or more values interspersed with text - formatting templates. Here is a simple example computing the display name of an identity:
>
> ```
> ${firstname} ${lastname}
> ```
>
> A formatting template is nothing more than text with embedded substitution placeholders. When rendering the template, the placeholders are substituted by the values they reference - which are specified using OrionQL expressions.
>
> There are two forms of placeholders - the normal one shown above, `${expression}` and the quoting placeholder `$"expression"`. The latter one puts the result of evaluating the expression between a pair of double quotes after correctly escaping any contained special characters, so that the result will be a proper Java String literal. For more details, see [[below]].

The filter template is appended to the object loading instruction in parentheses. The object to which this instruction is applied will have to deliver all values referenced by the filter template, so it will of course not be a string anymore like in the simple object loading instruction we saw first.

Let's illustrate this with an example. Suppose you have an `IdentityEntitlement`, and you need the `ManagedAttribute` referenced by it:

```
:ManagedAttribute(application.name==$"appName" && attribute==$"name" && value==$"value")
```

This will do a call to `context.getUniqueObject()`, loading the `ManagedAttribute`. The object will then be available for further accesses like if it were directly provided by the API.

Note that if a filter selects none or *more* than one object, `null` will be returned.

## This looks like we could do even more with it!

Indeed! Filters allow us to execute other queries too:

- If the filter expression is enclosed in square brackets (this notation was chosen by its similarity to Python list comprehensions), a List is returned with all objects selected by the filter (invoking `context.getObjects()`).
- If instead only a *stream* of these objects is needed, building the whole list in Memory can be avoided by instead prepending the filter expression by a greater-than sign (invoking `context.search()`).
- If the filter expression is prepended by a question mark, the number of matching objects is returned instead (invoking `context.countObjects()`).

Let's look at some examples. These expressions return a list respective stream of all applications the object is the owner of:

```
:Application([owner.id==$"id"])
:Application(>owner.id==$"id")
```

If we want to only *count* the applications owned, we instead write:

```
:Application(?owner.id==$"id")
```

### Filtering on name or ID again

The filter can be omitted if the selection is by name or ID. While the cases are rare where such a selection would return more than one object (they exist, however), in the normal cases this notation would only be used to check for object existence

```
:Identity(?)
```

or to get the query result as a List (of length 0 or 1):

```
:Identity([])
```

### What if I need only the newest object?

When multiple objects are selected, an ordering can be applied. In addition, a result set limit can be set that, if set to 1, will have the first object (if any) be returned directly instead of a list or stream with only one element. The following instruction will get the latest access request matching the filter `...`:

```
:IdentityRequest(>...,created desc,1)
```

## What about fetching attributes directly?

Loading objects from the database creates a substantial overhead. If the objects are not needed but only some of their attributes, queries can commonly be sped up by a factor of ten or more by fetching the attributes directly instead of the whole object (the IIQ API provides for this the `context.search()` variant with three parameters instead of two). To do this, prepend the filter expression with a comma separated list of the attributes to fetch, enclosed in curly braces. If, in the above example, we were interested only in the `name` and `sixAccountCreation` attributes of the applications owned, we would write

```
:Application([{name,sixAccountCreation}owner.id==$"id"])
```

An expression of this form will return the attributes requested for the objects selected by the filter as a list of `Map` objects containing key value pairs. If only a single attribute was requested, the list will contain the values directly.

Note that, as the example shows, *extended* attributes can be fetched as well.

Like above, the attributes clause can also be used without a filter, causing a select by name or ID. The following would be the logical equivalent of a `context.getObject()` call, but instead of the `Identity` *object* would return a Map containing the two requested attributes:

```
targetId:Identity({displayName,email})
```

With a single attribute, the expression would return the attribute value directly.

### Fetching attributes of child objects directly

If the list of attributes to fetch contains a navigation over a *to-many* relationship like `assignedRoles.name`, IIQ's `context.search()` method performs a join (an *outer* join to be exact), so the requested attributes of the child objects can be fetched directly. The following expression returns a list of the names of all assigned roles of the target identity:

```
targetId:Identity([{assignedRoles.name}])
```

This allows to retrieve this information without loading the object itself. Note however that due to the outer join, the list will not be empty when there are *no* assigned roles - it will contain a single `null` value in this case. Use an explicit filter expression and add a `notNull()` condition to avoid this:

```
:Identity([{assignedRoles.name}id==$"targetId" && assignedRoles.name.notNull()])
```

## A word about caching

When using OrionQL expressions, it is very likely that the result of some database lookup is needed several times, thus being part of several expressions. To not do the same queries over and over, all query results are cached automatically. The caching scope is defined by the application.

# Application defined lookup tables

Application code may provide its own lookup tables to the OrionQL processor to be used for value translations or lookups. They are accessed using the same syntax that is used for database lookups and work like a pre-populated cache, but use a lookup name starting with a lowercase letter instead of a class name. (If you know what you are doing, you can also use a class name but it is not recommended.) The lookup key is either the object the lookup is invoked upon or is computed analogously to the filter expressions of database lookups. The following example assumes that the application has installed a lookup table named `entitlementData`, containing some information about entitlements keyed by `application::attribute::value`, and the object it is invoked on is an `IdentityEntitlement`:

```
:entitlementData(${appName}::${name}::${value})
```

Note that no ?, {}, or [] modifiers are allowed for application defined lookups.

# Value transformations

Having read up to here, you probably already had the idea that using the colon notation it would be possible to provide some more useful transformations on the values we have so far. Let's have a look at what's already available.

## I have a collection of ... but I need a collection of ...

What you are asking for is an operation, in functional programming known as *mapping*. It is available by the `:map()` transformation which takes an expression as parameter and transforms the collection it is applied to to a new collection containing for every element of the original collection the result of applying the expression to this element. You have seen an example in the introduction above already.

### What is a collection?

Basically everything that can be iterated upon (so we would more precisely speak of an *Iterable*).

The obvious cases of collections are collection attributes like the `assignedRoles` attribute of an `Identity`. However, we could also want to iterate over the entries of a `Map`, for instance the `Map` returned by `Link.getEntitlementAttributes()`. Or we might want to iterate over multivalue attributes (like the entitlement attributes on `Link` objects) *even if they contain a single value only and thus are returned by IIQ as scalar*. (The IIQ API provides methods for this like `sailpoint.object.Attributes.``getList()` that implicitly convert scalars to lists.)

This means that a collection is everything you *use* as a collection. OrionQL will interpret the value according to your intentions automatically.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> So, what is a Map?
>
> At this point you may want to specifically note the different interpretations OrionQL gives to a `Map` depending on how you use it: If you perform an attribute access, a `Map.get()` is performed. If you submit it to a `:map()` or other operation expecting a collection, `Map.entrySet()` is used. In this sense, a `Map` is a hybrid.
>
> The evenly present hybrid nature of a scalar - masquerading as a collection with one element if required - is less prominent, but keep it in mind.

## Turning a List into a String

Java collections like any other Java object provide a default method to convert themselves into a string representation, however this may not be what you'd like to have. The `:join` transformation (named after the Python string method `join()`) concatenates the string representations of all collection elements by a newline (default)

```
assignedRoles:map(name):join
```

or any character sequence given to it as parameter. This will concatenate the elements by a colon surrounded by spaces:

```
assignedRoles:map(name):join( : )
```

## Regular expressions don's scare you, do they?

Regular expressions ([JDK documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/regex/Pattern.html)) are a very powerful tool to process text. Mastering them is a key to efficiently attack problems that would otherwise be difficult or expensive to solve. OrionQL provides three data transformations based on them.

### I need to get the user ID out of this message

You have to search for it, well? The `:match()` instruction will do the trick. It takes as parameter a regular expression and returns the first match of it in the string it was given as input (or the `toString()` result of it). The problem stated in the caption will be solved by the following expression:

```
:match(\\busr[0-9a-z]+\\b)
```

The `\b` sequence matches a word boundary, so the expression will not match parts of a word. The backslash needs to be escaped since it is an escape character in OrionQL itself.

If some text needs to be extracted for which no specific regular expression can be provided but that can be anchored to some other text, captures can be used. If the regular expression given to `:match()` contains captures, the last one is returned as match. As a silly example, assume we need to extract only the number of the application role is contained in the text, among other roles:

```
:match(Role([0-9]+\))
```

The regular expression we use is `Role([0-9]+)`, anchoring the number matched by the capturing group to the prefix `Role`. Note that we need to escape the closing parenthesis of the capturing group to prevent it being interpreted as the closing parenthesis of the `:match()` instruction.

There are uses for this instruction you wouldn't have expected upfront. Suppose you want to produce an overview about all applications (endpoints) that contains also the information if the application supports password provisioning. As we know, this information is contained in the `featuresString`. (The IIQ API allows to get the features also as an ENUM list, but this doesn't change the problem.) To get the value "PASSWORD" if the application supports password provisioning and else get `null`, you can use this expression:

```
featuresString:match(PASSWORD)
```

It will take the `featuresString` attribute and search for the string "PASSWORD". If a match is found, `:match()` will return it (that is, the matched text "PASSWORD"), otherwise it will return `null`. The `:format()` instruction described below permits setting up a value that should be used instead of `null`:

```
:format(featuresString:match(PASSWORD),-/-)
```

### I have a comma separated list of AuditEvent IDs but I need the events themselves

To extract *all* matches of a regular expression from a text and return them as a list, the `:extract()` instruction is available. It can use capturing groups in the same way as `:match()` and indeed differs from it only in *not* stopping after the first match (and in the type of the return value, of course). The following expression solves the problem stated in the caption:

```
:extract([0-9a-z]+):map(:AuditEvent)
```

### I need to clean up messages from contained variable information to be able to count them

To solve this and similar tasks, the `:replace()` instruction can be used. It effectively calls the Java String method `replaceAll()` with the regular expression and replacement that were given to it. (The replacement can access captures from the matched regular expression, so this can be quite powerful. Look up the details in the [JDK documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/regex/Matcher.html#replaceAll(java.lang.String)) when you need it - the cases you'll meet will be much more profane.)

Let's replace all logon IDs with three dots:

```
:replace((?i\)\\busr[0-9a-z]+\\b,...)
```

The construct `(?i)` in front of the regular expression sets the ignorecase flag, so what we are matching is the case-insensitive regular expression `usr[0-9a-z]+` surrounded by word boundaries.

# Object formatting

We had a quick look at formatting templates when we discussed [[object loading using Sailpoint filter expressions]] above. Formatting is used also by other OrionQL instructions. In addition, the templating mechanism is available for explicit use by the `:format()` instruction which we will look at now, examining also in more detail the features of the templating mechanism.

As formatting is also available as a standalone feature of OrionQL, it can also be used by application code directly.

## The :format() instruction

The `:format()` instruction allows to format objects as text and has its main uses in producing output. It takes as its only parameter a formatting template and applies it to the object that was given to it. You have already seen formatting templates in the text above. The following expression will return a list of the textual representations of the assigned roles of the identity the expression is applied to:

```
assignedRoles:map(:format(${displayName} (${name})))
```

The formatting template used herein is:

```
${displayName} (${name})
```

It returns the `displayName` followed by a blank and the `name` in parentheses. As you can see, there is no need to escape the closing parenthesis to prevent it being interpreted as the closing parenthesis of the `:format()` instruction, as the templating mechanism by default recognizes parentheses that are contained in the template and requires them to be balanced.

## Formatting templates

Formatting templates consist of text with embedded substitution placeholders. When they are rendered, the text is copied to the output literally while all placeholders are substituted by the result of the expression they contain.

Placeholders come in two forms. The standard form uses the syntax `${…}` with the braces containing the arguments for the placeholder replacement (see next section). An alternative syntax in which the braces are replaced by double quotes, `$"…"`, requests the result of the parameter substitution to be rendered as a quoted and correctly escaped String instead of being directly inserted into the output. We used this syntax already when formatting Sailpoint Filter expressions, so if needed refer to the examples above.

For `java.util.Date` values, the `$"…"` syntax is reinterpreted as "quoting" them into the form required by Sailpoint Filter expressions (`DATE$milliseconds`) like in this example (*get all `IdentityRequest`s for the same `targetId` that are younger that this one*):

```
:IdentityRequest([targetId==$"targetId" && created>$"created"])
```

 No format (see below) must be specified in this case.

## Placeholder parameters

In most cases, placeholders contain only an OrionQL expression. We saw many examples of this already. However, there are two other possible parameters:

1. A format. If it is present, it is the first parameter of the placeholder, separated from the OrionQL expression by a comma. It is recognized by the starting character being a percent sign. The available formats are described in the JDK (see [java.util.Formatter](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/Formatter.html#syntax)) - you may have used them already with `String.format()`.  
   For `java.util.Date` values, an additional syntax is provided (they *can* use `%t` formatting however) which uses [SimpleDateFormat](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/text/SimpleDateFormat.html). To use it, specify the `SimpleDateFormat` format, prepended by a percent sign.
2. A default value. If it is present, it follows the OrionQL expression, separated by a comma. The value, which may be also the empty string, will be used as output when the expression delivers a `null` value.

Let's look at an example. The following template will format application definitions with fixed-length fields (suitable to produce tabular output):

```
${%-40s,name} ${%yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss,created} ${%yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss,modified,                   } ${featuresString:match(PASSWORD),        } ${owner.displayableName,ORPHANED}
```

A special case of a placeholder expression is the empty string. It causes the object the formatting template is applied to to be inserted into the output (more exactly: its string representation). This is better shown with an OrionQL expression instead of a formatting template:

```
message:format(Processing result: ${})
```

The difference to the expression

```
:format(Processing result: ${message})
```

is the output that is produced when `message` is `null`: In the first case, after the `message` attribute delivered `null`, this is also the final result since the expression evaluation stops here. In the second case, `null` is formatted into the output string. (As a consequence of the expression evaluation stopping on `null` values, default values specified in the placeholder can only take effect if the expression is non-empty.)

# The `this` reference

As you probably concluded by now, OrionQL expressions are transformation pipelines receiving a value at the left end and pushing it through itself to the right end, on every stage doing a transformation like attribute access or other that produces the input value for the next stage.

There may be cases in which you need to access the object that went into the expression at its left end:

1. You need it to undo a navigation and get back to the initial input object. Here is an example:  
   `owner:format(${@.name} is owned by ${firstname} ${lastname})`  
   Navigating to `owner` first has not only the effect of being able to directly access its `firstname` and `lastname` attributes, but also makes the entire construct conditional in having it return `null` if `owner` is `null`.
2. You don't want to access an attribute of the object but the object itself (often when it's a String), but you need to specify a non-empty expression. You will see an example for case 2 [further below](#further-below).

To access the object that is the input to the expression, use the *at* character (@). The *at* character denotes *this*.

A *this* reference can sensibly be used only at the start of an expression - either one embedded in a nested construct (case 1) or a standalone one (case 2).

# Parent references

Whenever you are processing an element of a collection, you can get access to the parent object (the object from which the collection was retrieved) by using the pseudo attribute *circumflex* (^). To go up further the hierarchy, parent references can be chained like normal attributes using dots, but there are two more constructs to use: `^^` will navigate straight to the root of the object tree (the top-level object), while `^className` will navigate directly to the next object of the indicated class up the parent chain. (By having more `^`s in front of the class name, the second, third and so on object of this class can also be addressed.)

Note that the parent object is the one from which the collection was retrieved and thus generally not the parent object according to the object model. Instead, the parent relationships always reflect the access path used by your query (iteration hierarchy).

To provide an example: An `IdentityRequest` contains, among other things, a `ProvisioningProject` (`provisionedProject`) containing a number of `ProvisioningPlan`s each containing an `AccountRequest` that again contains a number of `AttributeRequest`s. The real nesting of the `AttributeRequest`s thus is quite deep. The following access path delivering the IIQ `AttributeRequest`s (role assignments) performed in the `IdentityRequest` (we use a convenience method on the provisioning project to directly access the IIQ provisioning plan), however, will make the `IdentityRequest` the parent of the the `AttributeRequest`s:

```
provisionedProject.iiqAccountRequest.attributeRequests
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Beware of using this expression!
>
> As experience shows, the IIQ convenience method `ProvisioningProject.getIIQAccountRequest()` used in the expression above does not align with the data that *can* be stored in a `ProvisioningProject` that is found in an `IdentityRequest` according to IIQ's object model: Not only can a `ProvisioningProject` contain more than one `AccountRequest` to handle multiple applications but it is also allowed to contain multiple `AccountRequests` for the *same* application, in particular IIQ. The following is a real example:
>
> ```xml
> <IdentityRequest completionStatus="Success" executionStatus="Completed" ... type="AccessRequest" ...>
>   <Attributes>
>     <Map>
>       ...
>       <entry key="provisionedProject">
>         <value>
>           <ProvisioningProject identity="...">
>             ...
>             <MasterPlan>
>               <ProvisioningPlan>
>                 <AccountRequest application="IIQ" op="Modify">
>                   ...
>                   <AttributeRequest ... name="assignedRoles" op="Add" value="Role077">
>                     ...
>                   </AttributeRequest>
>                 </AccountRequest>
>                 <AccountRequest application="IIQ" op="Modify">
>                   ...
>                   <AttributeRequest ... name="assignedRoles" op="Add" value="Role081">
>                     ...
>                   </AttributeRequest>
>                 </AccountRequest>
>                 <AccountRequest application="IIQ" op="Modify">
>                   ...
>                   <AttributeRequest ... name="assignedRoles" op="Add" value="Role075">
>                     ...
>                   </AttributeRequest>
>                 </AccountRequest>
>                 ...
>               </ProvisioningPlan>
>             </MasterPlan>
>             <ProvisioningPlan targetIntegration="IIQ" ...>
>               <AccountRequest application="IIQ" op="Modify" targetIntegration="IIQ">
>                 ...
>                 <AttributeRequest ... name="assignedRoles" op="Add" value="Role075">
>                   ...
>                 </AttributeRequest>
>               </AccountRequest>
>               ...
>             </ProvisioningPlan>
>             ...
>             <ProvisioningPlan targetIntegration="IIQ" ...>
>               <AccountRequest application="IIQ" op="Modify">
>                 ...
>                 <AttributeRequest ... name="assignedRoles" op="Add" value="Role081">
>                   ...
>                 </AttributeRequest>
>               </AccountRequest>
>               ...
>             </ProvisioningPlan>
>             ...
>             <ProvisioningPlan targetIntegration="IIQ" ...>
>               <AccountRequest application="IIQ" op="Modify" targetIntegration="IIQ">
>                 ...
>                 <AttributeRequest ... name="assignedRoles" op="Add" value="Role077">
>                   ...
>                 </AttributeRequest>
>               </AccountRequest>
>               ...
>             </ProvisioningPlan>
>             ...
>           </ProvisioningProject>
>         </value>
>       </entry>
>       ...
>     </Map>
>   </Attributes>
> ...
> </IdentityRequest>
> ```
>
> As you can see, the `ProvisioningProject` contains *three* IIQ account requests in the master plan, compiled to three separate provisioning plans beneath it, interspersed with the provisioning plans for the endpoints (not shown).
>
> However, the result of calling `.getProvisionedProject().getIIQAccountRequest()` on this `IdentityRequest` is:
>
> ```xml
> <AccountRequest application="IIQ" op="Modify" targetIntegration="IIQ">
>   <Attributes>
>     ...
>   </Attributes>
>   <AttributeRequest ... name="assignedRoles" op="Add" value="Role077">
>     ...
>   </AttributeRequest>
> </AccountRequest>
> ```
>
> Therefore, by using this access path, in this example two of the three role assignments will be hidden! To reliably get at all role assignments contained in an `IdentityRequest`, we therefore have to walk the data structure ourselves by using a flattening operation (see next section):
>
> `:flatten(provisionedProject.masterPlan.accountRequests#attributeRequests)`
>
> This is more or less a drop-in replacement for the original expression `provisionedProject.iiqAccountRequest.attributeRequests`, however it makes the account requests an additional intermediate parent level, so to reach the `IdentityRequest` from the `AttributeRequest`, two parent navigations instead of one are needed.
>
> Note that in this expression we rely on that the master plan contains no other account requests than for IIQ. An option not relying on this would be to use filtering getters like `ProvisioningProject.getPlans(target)` or `ProvisioningPlan.getAccountRequests(appName)`:
>
> `:flatten(provisionedProject.plans("IIQ")#accountRequests#attributeRequests)`
>
> `:flatten(provisionedProject.masterPlan.accountRequests("IIQ")#attributeRequests)`

Consequently, the following formatting template applied to an `AttributeRequest` from the list returned by the above expression has access to the identity request's target and the requester, both stored in the `IdentityRequest`, by using a single *up* navigation:

```
${^.requesterDisplayName} requested ${op} of role ${value} to/from ${^.targetDisplayName}
```

This way, when crafting queries, parent navigation will only need to consider the query itself, not the possibly complicated parent relationships in the IIQ object model behind the scenes.

# The objects I need are spread over a whole hierarchy of objects!

Now that we are aware of parent relationships, we are prepared to think about more complex data constellations than we saw up to now.

You might, for instance, have to deal with all the entitlements an identity has on all her accounts (of course, an escape would be to resort to the `IdentityEntitlements` table, but imagine you want to check the data there against the data in the `Link` objects). Or you need all the entitlements granted by all roles that are assigned to an identity (this, in contrast, *doesn't* have an easy solution). In both cases the target objects are contained in the downs of an object hierarchy. To extract them, you need some kind of a *flattening* operation.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> What is flattening?
>
> The *flatten* operation is a concept known in functional programming. Suppose you have a list of lists, and you need to have all elements of the lower level lists in *one* big list - without the separation created by the list hierarchy. So, what you want to do is effectively, remove the intermediate list level or *flatten* the list hierarchy. In code, you would iterate over all elements of the top level list and for every one of them add its contents to the result:
>
> ```java
> List<List<?>> input = ...
> List<?> output = new ...
> for (var sublist: input)
> {
> 	output.addAll(sublist);
> }
> ```
>
> While defined for a two-level list hierarchy, the flattening operation could also be generalized to a multi level list hierarchy by recursively unpacking the lists. In the general case however, this will require some sort of control how deep the recursive algorithm should go. OrionQL's flattening operation uses explicit specifications for the nested levels to operate upon, as you will see below.

The `:flatten()` instruction produces a (*virtual*) collection of all the objects from an object hierarchy that are located at a specific topographical location (level) within that hierarchy. This position is specified by a sequence of access paths (OrionQL expressions) each specifying the collection to iterate upon at its level. The algorithm starts at the current object, applying the first expression to it to retrieve the top level collection, then iterates over its elements applying to each of them the second expression to retrieve the collections of the next level, and continues in this manner until it has reached the bottom level with the elements that go into the result collection.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> This way, the `:flatten()` instruction can be also seen as a flat iteration over a nested object hierarchy. It makes many tasks a lot easier that would otherwise have to be solved using nested constructs.

To illustrate how the `:flatten()` instruction works, let's look at how to implement the second example from the introductory paragraph. From the identity's *assigned roles* we can query the *required roles* (there is a convenience method resolving the recursion problem for us), which are the entitlement roles. Every one of them has one or more *profiles*, each with on or more *constraints*. Assuming these to be `containsAll` filters, each one gives us a list of *values*. Let's write this down:

```
:flatten(assignedRoles#flattenedRequirements#profiles#constraints#value)
```

The hash marks which separate the OrionQL expressions applied at the various hierarchy levels denote in a very pictographic way (better than commas would do) the collection "unpacking" operations, so this notation reads: "Take the `assignedRoles`, and for each of them take all `flattenedRequirements`, for each of those all `profiles`, for each profile all `constraints`, and for each constraint put all elements of the `value` attribute into the result."

Note that `value` on the constraint (a `Filter.LeafFilter`) is of type `Object`, but for a `containsAll` filter we have to assume a list. This is why we include it in the flattening operation we could otherwise end with the constraint, expecting to contain a scalar `value`.

The collection returned by the flattening operation is purely virtual. (Technically, it's an `Iterable` operating on the original object hierarchy.) What is especially important is that *all the objects contained in it have all their parent relationships intact*, meaning you can navigate upwards the iteration hierarchy using the ^ pseudo attribute. The parent of the objects iterated upon at the top level is the object to which the `:flatten()` instruction was applied, and the parent of that is `this` (if different).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note that the objects that are contained in the flattened collection (in our example the `value` Strings), are often useless *without* their parent information. This is particularly true in this example since the `value` does not specify an entitlement unambiguously.

Let's convert the values into `ManagedAttribute` objects. For this, we append the following transformation to the above expression

```
:map(:ManagedAttribute(application.name==$"^.^.application.name" && attribute==$"^.property" && value==$"@"))
```

This loads the `ManagedAttribute`s using a filter expression. As you can see, we get the application and attribute name from up the hierarchy (profile and constraint).

Note also the `this` reference (@) used for the `value` condition. If the collection contained objects of which we needed an attribute, we had simply given the attribute name here. But in our case the collection contains the values themselves, so we have to access them using the `this` notation.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Why can't we use an empty expression?
>
> The empty expression we already saw [earlier](#earlier) performs a *null* access, that is, it returns the value computed so far. At the very start of an expression - not nested inside a construct that is not at the start of the expression - we would expect it to return the object the expression is applied to. In our case, this would be the `value` string.
>
> However, for evaluating OrionQL expressions, objects are wrapped into OrionQL proxies. Using the `this` reference we get the string out of the proxy.
>
> Note that in the example above where we used an empty expression, we could *not* have used a `this` reference in place of it since it would take us back to the object the expression was applied to. So, despite both constructs may seem similar, they are indeed quite different.

An interesting detail of the above processing is that the `ManagedAttribute` objects in the collection returned by the `:map()` operation again have the `Identity` object as parent. This is due to the fact that the `:flatten()` operation as well as the `:map()` operation are executed on the same hierarchy level - the `Identity` object.

If you don't really need the `ManagedAttribute` objects but only need something unambiguously identifying the entitlement, loading them is waste. In this case a better approach would be to compute a string composed of all the key attributes - application, attribute and value. A simple concatenation by, for instance, double colons, hash marks or any other seldomly used characters would suffice, but you could easily use also the filter expression from the `ManagedAttribute` loading above. The code would be exactly the same with "ManagedAttribute" substituted by "format". This would give you the opportunity to use this filter expression later in the processing to really *load* the ManagedAttribute (probably only for a subset of all of them).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> What about duplicates?
>
> In a diamond role composition situation the same entitlement will end up in the list multiple times. This is not a severe problem if the only thing you need the list for is an existence check. If you need it for output, in most cases the duplicates would need to be removed. There are ideas for constructs that would allow this to do but as of now, none has been implemented.

A note about caching (see [section below](#section-below)): Since the result of the `:flatten()` operation is effectively only a shallow Iterator with a reference to the original data structure, there is no gain from caching it. It may, however, make sense to cache the result of processing it. We would, then, include the whole expression into a `:cache()` instruction:

```
:cache(${id}.roleEntitlements,:flatten(assignedRoles...):map(...))
```

# How to not recompute the same stuff repeatedly

As already noted, the results of database lookups are automatically cached. Sometimes, however, it may be desirable to prevent the repeated computation of expressions even when they are computed entirely in memory. To achieve this, the `:cache()` instruction can be used to explicitly cache them. The application program defines the lifetime of the cache.

The `:cache()` instruction takes two parameters - a template expression for the cache key and the expression which's result should be cached. Suppose we need the list of the names of a target identity's assigned roles repeatedly and want to avoid the memory allocation overhead of repeatedly recomputing it from the list of assigned roles that is available from the (automatically cached) identity:

```
:cache(${targetId}.assignedRoleNames,targetId:Identity.assignedRoles:map(name))
```

So, the template for the caching key would be `${targetId}.assignedRoleNames`, meaning that the key will be identity's ID followed by ".assignedRoleNames"

Note that `targetId` can be factored out of the expression like this, however the verbose version may appear more readable:

```
targetId:cache(${}.assignedRoleNames,:Identity.assignedRoles:map(name))
```

The `:cache()` construct can be used to give names to expressions and even omit the expressions subsequently if the control flow assures that the value has been already computed. This can make complex code a lot more comprehensible. It is essentially like defining variables for some expressions. (They need globally unique names, however, in respect to the scope in which the application program executes the expressions.)

For this reason, the second parameter of the instruction (the expression) is optional. However, an error will be raised if a missing cache key is accessed and no expression is provided.

# A layer on top

After we have covered all the constructs OrionQL offers you for querying and transforming data, there is on final piece missing: Assume, you want to determine the responsible person for an entitlement, but as data is incomplete, you need to try several alternatives.

OrionQL provides a simple mechanism to solve this problem: Instead of a single expression, you can provide several expressions to be tried in sequence until a result is found (indicated by a non-null value). The expressions are separated by pipe symbols. As an example, if your preferred try were the entitlement owner and, if this fails, the application owner, the following expression would do the trick:

```
owner|application.owner
```

This feature is available ubiquitously: *Wherever* an OrionQL expression is accepted, a sequence of OrionQL expressions separated by pipe symbols is accepted too. They will be tried in sequence until the first non-null result.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The application program executing your query may provide additional values with predefined names that are available to the expression evaluation. It might, for instance, define a fallback identity `IAMCC`. In this case, the above example could turn into
>
> ```
> owner|application.owner|IAMCC
> ```
>
> Note that `IAMCC` here is *not* a regular attribute of the object the expression is applied to but is an artificial "attribute" that was "implanted" into it by the application code that evaluated the expression.
