
# CerberusLogic Reference

CerberusLogic mini language provides a notation for business rules that can be used in different applications that require taking decisions by checking specified conditions on objects. This document describes the available constructs.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> A universal language
>
> CerberusLogic is like a Chameleon, which colors its skin depending on the environment:
>
> Whatever you use it for, the CerberusLogic code will always look like the language was specifically crafted for *that*.
>
> What CerberusLogic *does* is providing a notation and an execution engine for taking decisions on objects. It is by itself *fully agnostic* to the meanings of these decisions on application level. Here are some examples:
>
> - The following code is part of a rule set that takes decisions on additional entitlements:
>
>   ```javascript
>   Decision( "reportiam" ).when(
>   	"Disconnected entitlement",
>   	ne( "aggregationState", "Connected" )
>   )
>   ```
> - The following code illustrates using CerberusLogic to specify the state transitions of a finite state automaton that handles employee lifecycle:
>
>   ```javascript
>   Action( "setup" ).when(
>   	eq( "state", "CREATED" ),
>   	lt( "startDate", ":now(+7d)" )
>   )
>   Action( "join" ).when(
>   	eq( "state", "PREPARED" ),
>   	lt( "startDate", ":now" )
>   )
>   Action( "deactivate" ).when(
>   	eq( "state", "ACTIVE" ),
>   	lt( "endDate", ":now" )
>   )
>   Action( "cleanup" ).when(
>   	eq( "state", "LEFT" ),
>   	lt( "endDate", ":now(-30d)" )
>   )
>   ```
> - The following code selects `Link` objects with *admin* entitlements:
>
>   ```javascript
>   Link().accept(
>   	any( "groups", like( ".", "admin" ) )
>   )
>   ```
> - The following code computes a `risk` attribute based on some condition checks:
>
>   ```javascript
>   Attribute( "risk" ).when(
>   	"\"high\"", mt( "assignedRoles", 10, eq( "critical", true ) )
>   ).when(
>   	"\"medium\"", any( "assignedRoles", eq( "critical", true ) )
>   ).when(
>   	"\"low\""
>   )
>   ```
> - The following code directs the `IndexedData.transform()` method to process a multi-level mapping by discarding all level 1 entries with less than two subentries:
>
>   ```javascript
>   Level( 1 ).accept(
>   	mt( "value", 1 )
>   )
>   ```
> - The following code directs the `IndexedData.transform()` method to process a multi-level mapping by transforming the values on level 2 into barcharts:
>
>   ```javascript
>   Level( 2 ).accept(
>   	"value:barchart"
>   )
>   ```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> While formally being independent of the concrete *expression language* used to access the data to examine, in practice CerberusLogic will be used by most application code in conjunction with OrionQL, so the expressions used in the conditions will be OrionQL expressions. In this document we will keep the expressions simple and intuitively understandable, but you will leverage the full power of CerberusLogic only when also mastering OrionQL.

Contents:

- [Basic syntax elements](#basic-syntax-elements)
- [Macros](#macros)
- [Rule set syntax](#rule-set-syntax)
  - [Configuration section](#configuration-section)
  - [Rules](#rules)
    - [Rule header](#rule-header)
    - [Actions](#actions)
- [Rule set execution](#rule-set-execution)
- [Selectors](#selectors)
  - [Attribute selectors](#attribute-selectors)
    - [Equality selectors: eq(), ne()](#equality-selectors-eq-ne)
    - [Pattern matching selectors: like(), unlike()](#pattern-matching-selectors-like-unlike)
    - [Comparing selectors: gt(), ge(), le(), lt(), between(), outside()](#comparing-selectors-gt-ge-le-lt-between-outside)
    - [Membership test selectors: in(), notin()](#membership-test-selectors-in-notin)
    - [References](#references)
  - [Collection selectors](#collection-selectors)
    - [Presence checking selectors: any(), none(), all(), notall()](#presence-checking-selectors-any-none-all-notall)
    - [Counting selectors: mt(), me(), fe(), ft(), num()](#counting-selectors-mt-me-fe-ft-num)
  - [Logical selectors](#logical-selectors)
    - [Negation: not()](#negation-not)
    - [Logic and operation: and(), nand()](#logic-and-operation-and-nand)
    - [Logic or operation: or(), nor()](#logic-or-operation-or-nor)

# Basic syntax elements

CerberusLogic uses a simple syntax with the basic elements resembling Java syntax:

- Literals can be numbers (integer and floating point), booleans (`true` and `false`), strings and `null`.
- String literals are enclosed in double quotes. Any double quote characters they need to contain must be escaped with a backslash (\), the same applies to the backslash itself.
- String literals recognize the embedded escape sequence `\n`, which is translated into a newline character. Any other escape sequences translate into the escaped character itself.
- String literals are allowed to span multiple lines.
- A special syntax allows string literals to use a multi-line layout *without* the literal actually *containing* line breaks: Any line that ends with a backslash is joined with the following line, also skipping any leading whitespace.
- Between all syntax elements whitespace is accepted, except between the identifier of a *rule*, *action* or *config entry* and its opening parenthesis (`(`).
- Comments use the Java *line comment* syntax (`//`).

# Macros

CerberusLogic allows to define and reuse code snippets through a macro mechanism. This mechanism performs a simple text substitution, replacing macro references with their expansions. Macro parameters are not supported.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> To use macros, the application code needs to provide a macro library to CerberusLogic. (Consult the application to see which macros are available.)

Macro references consist of the macro name enclosed in a pair of dollar signs and are accepted between syntax elements where whitespace and comments are accepted.

Macros can contain references to other macros. Be sure however to not define macro loops – this will lead to infinite expansion!

# Rule set syntax

An CerberusLogic *compilation unit*, called *rule set*, consists of an optional *configuration section* followed by one or more *rules*:

We will look at both parts in the following subsections.

Note that, as visible in the syntax diagram, *pseudo rule sets*, consisting of *only* a configuration section, are also possible. They can be used by application code to facilitate configuration inheritance or even use CerberusLogic only as a *configuration mechanism* (that is, *not* using rules at all).

## Configuration section

A configuration section can be embedded at the start of a rule set using the keyword `config` followed by a pair of parentheses enclosing a comma separated list of configuration parameters, called *named values*. The configuration section can be optionally terminated by a semicolon:

A named value is represented by the name followed by a pair of parentheses enclosing the value:

An empty pair of parentheses denotes a `null` value. While de-referencing such a configuration parameter in the application code will give the same result as an undefined parameter (i.e. `null`), there is an important difference when using configuration inheritance: Undefined parameters let the inherited values shine through while defined parameters overwrite them, possibly also with `null`. (For this reason, it is not recommended for application code to explicitly distinguish between `null` and undefined values although this is possible by checking the *presence* of the parameter - this would collide with the parameter override mechanism.)

Values can be of the following types:

- Scalar (String, Integer, Boolean, ...)
- List of scalars (comma separated)
- Map (represented as a list of named values)

They are represented by the following syntax diagram:

> [!IMPORTANT]
> You may have noticed that the Map syntax (list of named values) is used by the configuration section itself (the configuration is presented to the application code also as Map) and that the syntax allows recursion, so you can have arbitrarily nested Maps (Maps of Maps).

The following fictitious configuration shows each type of parameter:

```javascript
config(
    threshold(100),
    endpoints("AD Direct", "AD lite"),
    notification(
        emailTemplate("ReportFinished"),
        attachReport(true)
    )
)
```

## Rules

Implementing rules is the main purpose of CerberusLogic - they represent the business logic to apply to the problem domain.

- A *rule set* contains one or more *rules*.
- A *rule* consists of a *header* and one or more *actions* and can be optionally terminated by a semicolon.
- The *actions* define the decisions that can be taken.

The following diagram describes the rule syntax:

Before explaining the elements of the diagram, let's illustrate the rule syntax with an example:

```javascript
IdentityRequest(
    // ignore IdentityRequests referencing a deleted identity
    ne( "targetId:Identity", null )
).accept(
    // consider only "Add" request items
    eq( "op", "Add" )
).reject()
```

### Rule header

The rule header specifies the applicability of the rule and optionally provides a rule ID. It consists of an identifier followed by a pair of parentheses containing the optional parameters:

- a *rule ID*
- one or more *selectors* that define the applicability of the rule

The identifier used for the rule header is defined by the application code and is not interpreted by CerberusLogic in any way - the only restriction is that it starts with a capital letter. It is normally chosen in a way that supports an intuitive understanding of what the rule is supposed to express.

The *rule ID* is a string or other value (implicitly converted to a string) that is returned to the application code when a decision was made. It can be used by the application code in any way and is not interpreted by CerberusLogic. (Consult the application to see what to put here.)

The *selectors* determine the conditions under which the rule applies. A rule applies if all selectors match or if none are given. The application code decides which object the selectors are checked against. Selectors are described in the [main part of this document](#main-part-of-this-document).

### Actions

The *actions* define the decisions that can be taken by a rule. Like the rule header, an action consists of the action name followed by a pair of parentheses containing the optional parameters:

- an *action ID*
- one or more *selectors* that define when the action is triggered

The action name specifies the decision to be taken when the action is triggered. A decision is either positive or negative but for notational purposes for each one an alias name is also provided, so depending on the business context the most intuitive notation can be chosen:

- `accept()` alias `when()` (positive decision)
- `reject()` alias `fail()` (negative decision)

See the code block below for an example using the alternative names (the negative decision is not used there). The regular names were already shown in the example above.

The *action ID* is a string that that is returned to the application code when a decision was made. It can be used by the application code in any way and is not interpreted by CerberusLogic. (Consult the application to see what to put here.)

The *selectors* determine the conditions under which the the action is triggered. An action is triggered if all selectors match or if none are given. The application code decides which object the selectors are checked against. Selectors are described in the [main part of this document](#main-part-of-this-document).

# Rule set execution

The purpose of CerberusLogic is to provide a notation for *taking decisions* based on certain *condition checks*. As such, the syntax it provides is fully agnostic to the concrete application use case, focusing on only the notation aspect. The *meaning* of what has been encoded in the rules is entirely defined by the application code that uses them.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Since CerberusLogic itself is agnostic to what it is used for, rule set authors need to consult your application documentation to know in which way the rules need to be written – particularly what identifiers are to be used for the rule headers, what goes into the rule and action IDs, if any, and what will be the result of the rule set execution. CerberusLogic cannot give any guidance about this.

An application can choose between two different rule set execution modes. Both have in common that out of all rules contained in the rule set only the *applicable* ones (according to their selectors) are examined while all other rules are ignored:

- In *decision* mode, the rules are evaluated from top to bottom *until one of them triggers an action*. This ends rule set evaluation, and the decision made by the action is returned to the application. If the bottom of the rule set is reached without any action having been triggered, this means that the rule set *didn't* make a decision, and `null` is returned.
- In *evaluation* mode, *all* rules are evaluated and a `Map` is returned to the application containing an entry for each rule that had a positive decision triggered. It maps the rule ID to either the ID of the triggered action or – interpreting the action ID as an expression – the result of evaluating that expression on the object. Any negative decision will let the entire rule set execution *fail* by throwing an exception. (This is what the `fail()` alias is intended to be used for.  
  Obviously, in *evaluation mode* the rule set should be crafted in a way that rules don't inadvertently overwrite each other's results.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> An intuitive view at rule sets
>
> The sequence of actions in a rule can be seen as a kind of a *cascaded sieve*. It filters the objects poured in at the top by having each action sort out the objects matching its triggering condition and passing the remaining ones down the cascade.
>
> In *evaluation* mode, this concept works within rules only, while in *decision* mode it extends also *across* rules, making the *entire rule set* a cascaded sieve.

Rule sets have an important property that can be used by applications. It derives from having selectors not only at the *action* level but also at the *rule* level. This permits a *two level approach* to the problem, possibly even checking the *rule* and *action* selectors against *different* objects. While in simple cases there may be no use for this, and all checks can be done entirely on the *action* level using a *single* rule with no selector, the possible uses are manifold:

- Structuring the rule set for better readability and maintainability by factoring out decision conditions common for multiple actions by grouping them into separate rules
- Checking different objects against each other by using one object to *select the rules* that will check the other object
- Nested checks, where a primary object that does not select *any* rule will be immediately discarded, skipping any further computations to derive the secondary object(s) to check against the rules

# Selectors

Selectors are at the core of CerberusLogic, specifying the conditions under which rules and actions apply. The following sections describe the available selectors. Note that while the selectors carry the conditions to check, the objects to be checked are determined by the application code.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note the similarity between selectors and IIQ Filter expressions: Having statically imported `sailpoint.object.Filter.*`, you won't be able to tell if the following code is an IIQ filter expression written in Java or an CerberusLogic selector:
>
> ```javascript
> and(
> 	or(
> 		eq("type", "FunctionalRole"),
> 		eq("type", "ApplicationRole")
> 	),
> 	eq("owner.name", "usrxy"),
> 	gt("sixCCA", 1)
> )
> ```
>
> However, CerberusLogic selectors are a lot more powerful than IIQ filters, especially when being combined with advanced OrionQL expressions.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Argument convention
>
> All selectors except composite selectors obey the same convention that the attribute checked by the selector is the first argument.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Selector pairs
>
> While there is a dedicated `not()` selector that inverts the result of the selector it wraps, to facilitate a compacter notation all selectors have an inverted counterpart that can be used instead of a `not()` wrapping. Note however, that when dealing with `null` values, the results of the two approaches may differ: The value `null` is neither *greater* nor *less* nor *not greater* (less or equal) nor *not less* (greater or equal) than any value, nor is it *within* or *outside* of any range, but it *is* `not(all of this)`.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> What are expressions?
>
> CerberusLogic uses *expressions* to specify the values that are to be checked by the selectors. These expressions are opaque to CerberusLogic and are represented in the rule code simply as strings. The interpretation of these strings as well as their syntax is defined by the application code. However, most (if not all) application code will use OrionQL, so we will use it in the examples too.

## Attribute selectors

Attribute selectors are the most basic selectors. They check a single value - often an object attribute but remember that expressions are not limited to returning object attributes even if in the examples we will use simple expressions like these. We will, in the text, also use the term *attribute* for what the expressions stand for, ignoring the fact that indeed it can be *anything* that can be computed from an object.

### Equality selectors: eq(), ne()

The following two selectors allow comparing an attribute for equality/inequality with one or more values:

| selector   | transcription   | returns true if                                                                                                       |
|:-----------|:----------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| eq         | equal           | the attribute value is equal to the given value, or - if several are given - *any* of the values (`null` allowed)     |
| ne         | not equal       | the attribute value is not equal to the given value, or - if several are given - *any* of the values (`null` allowed) |

> [!IMPORTANT]
> While mostly used with scalars, the *eq()*/*ne()* selectors accept any attribute value type that can be compared for equality. However, objects like Lists will commonly be compared to [reference](#reference)s, not literals.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Null values
>
> Note that these selectors allow to check for *null* values also. This is different from SQL as well as Sailpoint filter expressions that require special constructs for this (`is null`/`is not null` and `isnull()`/`notNull()` respectively). This way, CerberusLogic selectors allow a compacter notation in cases where a *null* value also fulfils the condition to be checked. The same behavior is implemented in the pattern matching selectors (see next section).

### Pattern matching selectors: like(), unlike()

The following two selectors allow checking an attribute against a regular expression:

| selector   | transcription   | returns true if                                                                                                                                |
|:-----------|:----------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| like       | like            | a match can be found for one of the given regular expressions (`null` allowed, see below) in the string representation of the attribute value  |
| unlike     | unlike          | no match can be found for any of the given regular expressions (`null` allowed, see below) in the string representation of the attribute value |

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note that it is not necessary for the *entire* input string to match the regular expression - is it enough if a match can be *found* anywhere *within* the input string. If needed however, it is always possible to request a match of the entire input string by anchoring the pattern to the start and the end of the input. (If using `^` and `$`, be aware of their behavior for multiline input if indicated!)

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note that this is different from the behavior of the SQL LIKE clause: The latter one always matches the *entire* column value, so wildcards need to be added to the start and/or end of the pattern to allow matching only part of it (a.k.a. *substring search*).

Including `null` into the list of patterns allows to accept *null* values in addition to values that match one of the patterns.

For regular expressions, see the [Java regular expression](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/regex/Pattern.html) reference or this primer: [Using Regular Expressions](/spaces/OCA/pages/265180942/Using+Regular+Expressions). In the easiest case where the pattern is a simple string literal, a *substring search* will be performed.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Matching against a reference
>
> When a pattern is a reference, the value it references will not be interpreted as a regular expression. Instead, a substring search will be done.

### Comparing selectors: gt(), ge(), le(), lt(), between(), outside()

The following selectors allow comparing an attribute against one or two values (they work for all *comparable* attribute value types):

| selector   | transcription    | returns true if                                                                                                             |
|:-----------|:-----------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| gt         | greater than     | the attribute value is greater than the given value                                                                         |
| ge         | greater or equal | the attribute value is greater than or equal to the given value                                                             |
| le         | less or equal    | the attribute value is less than or equal to the given value                                                                |
| lt         | less than        | the attribute value is less than the given value                                                                            |
| between    | between          | the attribute value is within the closed interval defined by the lower and upper value (*closed* = boundaries included)     |
| outside    | outside          | the attribute value is outside of the closed interval defined by the lower and upper value (*closed* = boundaries included) |

### Membership test selectors: in(), notin()

The following two selectors allow checking an attribute for being contained in a collection:

| selector   | transcription   | returns true if                                                                          |
|:-----------|:----------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| in         | in              | the attribute value is contained in the collection returned by the second expression     |
| notin      | not in          | the attribute value is not contained in the collection returned by the second expression |

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note the difference between the *in()* CerberusLogic selector and the IIQ *in()* Sailpoint filter expression: The latter one takes a collection as the second parameter, allowing to compare the attribute against a literal list of values:
>
> ```javascript
> in("type", List.of("EntitlementRole", "OrganizationalRole", "organizational"))
> ```
>
> CerberusLogic covers this functionality already in the *eq()* selector, turning the above into:
>
> ```javascript
> eq("type", "EntitlementRole", "OrganizationalRole", "organizational")
> ```
>
> Consequently, as there is no need for the *in()*/*notin()* selectors to support literal lists, they can always interpret their second argument as a reference, saving the syntactic overhead. This makes them different from all other selectors which always use their value arguments as literals unless *explicitly* marked as [reference](#reference).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The *in()* family selectors provide a convenience notation for the equivalent `any(eq(ref()))` construct which is a frequent special case of the `any(operation(ref()))` type of constructs. So, while they are not strictly necessary, they make life much easier (especially in *already* complex cases).

### References

With the exception of the *in()* family selectors, all attribute selectors use literals to check the result of the expression in the first argument against. To check them against *other* expressions, references can be used. They wrap an expression for use as a selector parameter where a literal is expected and cause the expression to be evaluated whenever the "literal" value is needed:

References allow, for instance, to compare attributes to other attributes.

## Collection selectors

Collection selectors check collection values by examining their elements. Most often, the collection is the value of an object attribute but remember that expressions are not limited to returning object attributes.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> What is a collection?
>
> In short, like for OrionQL, a collection (more precisely, an *Iterable*) is everything you *use* as a collection. That is, *whatever* you give as input to one of the collection selectors will be *treated* as a collection:
>
> - If it's a collection like those contained in collection attributes such as `assignedRoles`, this is obvious.
> - If it's a `Map`, it's assumed that you want to iterate over its entries, so the `Map`'s *entry set* is used as input.
> - If it's a scalar, a multivalue attribute is assumed that only *happened* to contain a *single value*. This value is wrapped into a collection containing it as the only element.
> - If it's `null`, it is represented as an empty collection.
>
> You might initially be worried about the implicit transformations, fearing unexpected side effects. In fact however, CerberusLogic faithfully follows your data model expertise and carries out your intentions codified in the expressions. This prevents bothering you with explicit conversions and gives you great power. Be warned however, that if you don't know what you are doing, you won't get many hints about what's wrong with your expressions. As with any great power, the responsibility is yours.

### Presence checking selectors: any(), none(), all(), notall()

The following two pairs of selectors check for the presence or absence of elements satisfying specific conditions (if given). They check each of the elements of the collection returned by the expression in the first argument against each of the selectors specified in the remaining arguments and return if *any*, *none*, *all* or *not all* elements satisfy all the selectors (the result is returned as soon as it is *known*, possibly skipping the check of the remaining collection elements):

| selector   | transcription   | returns true if                                                                            |
|:-----------|:----------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| any        | any             | the collection contains at least one element [satisfying all specified selectors, if any]  |
| none       | none            | the collection contains no element [satisfying all specified selectors, if any]            |
| all        | all             | the collection contains only elements satisfying all specified selectors                   |
| notall     | not all         | the collection contains at least one element that does not satisfy all specified selectors |

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note that *notall()* is different from *not(all())* but is instead equivalent to *any(not())*!
>
> The difference manifests itself when the checked collection is empty.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note that only the *any()*/*none()* selectors can be used without a selector. They check if the collection contains *any* or *no* elements *at all*, in this case.

### Counting selectors: mt(), me(), fe(), ft(), num()

The following five selectors check the number of elements satisfying specific conditions (if given). They check the elements of the collection returned by the expression in the first argument against each of the selectors specified in the remaining arguments, counting the matching ones (the result is returned as soon as it is *known*, possibly skipping the check of the remaining collection elements):

| selector   | transcription   | returns true if                                                                                                               |
|:-----------|:----------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| mt         | more than       | the collection contains more than the specified number of elements [satisfying all specified selectors, if any]               |
| me         | more or equal   | the collection contains at least the specified number of elements [satisfying all specified selectors, if any]                |
| fe         | fewer or equal  | the collection contains no more than the specified number of elements [satisfying all specified selectors, if any]            |
| ft         | fewer than      | the collection contains less than the specified number of elements [satisfying all specified selectors, if any]               |
| num        | number          | the number of elements in the collection [satisfying all specified selectors, if any] is within the specified closed interval |

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Note that the *num()* selector is the most expensive one since it will *always* iterate the collection to its end.

## Logical selectors

Logical selectors apply logical operations to other selectors. They don't do any checks themselves on their input object but pass it to the wrapped selectors, evaluating them one after the other until the result is known.

### Negation: not()

The *not()* selector inverts the result of the wrapped selector:

| selector   | transcription   | returns true if                     |
|:-----------|:----------------|:------------------------------------|
| not        | not             | the wrapped selector returned false |

### Logic *and* operation: and(), nand()

The following two selectors check if *all* of the wrapped selectors are satisfied:

| selector   | transcription   | returns true if                                                                           |
|:-----------|:----------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| and        | and             | all of the wrapped selectors return true                                                  |
| nand       | negated and     | not all of the wrapped selectors return true (any of the wrapped selectors returns false) |

The *nand()* selector is a convenience notation for `not(and(...))`.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> What is NAND?
>
> If you have a background in electronic engineering, you know these elementary circuits, called logic gates, that perform logic operations on their input lines - in particular AND, OR, NAND and NOR gates. The NAND gates, doing an AND operation and negating the result, were historically the ones with the easiest implementation and thus appeared first (the 7400 *Quad dual input NAND* gate was the first one of the 74 series). At the same time NAND gates allow to build *any* logical circuit, what is not true for, e.g. AND or OR gates. (You know the Boolean calculus, don't you?)
>
> So, that's easy to remember: *nand()* is an *and()* with the result negated.

### Logic *or* operation: or(), nor()

The following two selectors check if *any* of the wrapped selectors is satisfied:

| selector   | transcription   | returns true if                                                                        |
|:-----------|:----------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| or         | or              | any of the wrapped selectors returns true                                              |
| nor        | negated or      | none of the wrapped selectors returns true (all of the wrapped selectors return false) |

The *nor()* selector is a convenience notation for `not(or(...))`.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> What is NOR?
>
> If you have read the above box *What is NAND*, you already know: *nor()* is an *or()* with the result negated. That's easy to remember, isn't it?
