<p>This page lists the rules written for the Rule Runner platform. Private rules may be described here as well.</p><ac:structured-macro ac:name="info" ac:schema-version="1" ac:macro-id="2a135173-33eb-4c85-8575-98cc2a8b60da"><ac:parameter ac:name="title">Important!</ac:parameter><ac:rich-text-body><p>When adding new rules in the tables below, please sort them by name!</p></ac:rich-text-body></ac:structured-macro><h1>Naming convention</h1><p>Rule Runner rules are named in all lowercase, using the underscore as word separator. A prefix of either <code>six_</code> or <code><em>userid</em>_</code> is used depending on the rule type:</p><ul><li>Official rules: <code>six_</code> <br />Example: <code>six_generic_query</code></li><li>Inofficial rules: <code><em>userid</em>_</code> <br />Example: <code>txyz_debug_ssl</code></li></ul><h1>Rule Runner Cockpit</h1><p>The following Generic Query lists all rules available for the Rule Runner (link to INT environment):</p><p style="margin-left: 40.0px;"><a href="https://identitiq.localdomain.com/identityiq/rulerunner/rulerunner.jsf?rule=six_generic_query&amp;title=Rule+Runner+Cockpit&amp;className=Rule&amp;filter=name.startsWith%28+%22six_%22+%29+%7C%7C+name.startsWith%28+%22usr%22+%29&amp;ordering=name&amp;selector=Rule%28%29.accept%28+like%28+%22name%22%2C+%22%5Esix_%22%2C+%22%5Eusr%5Ba-z0-9%5D%2B_%22+%29+%29&amp;output=link%3D%3Alink%28%2Fidentityiq%2Frulerunner%2Frulerunner.jsf%3Frule%3D%24%7Bname%7D%2C%24%7Bname%7D%29%0Adescription">Rule Runner Cockpit</a></p><p>The rules are documented in the sections below.</p><h1>Official rules</h1><p>These rules are under version control and therefore are regularly deployed.</p><table class="wrapped"><colgroup><col /><col /></colgroup><tbody><tr><th scope="col">Rule name</th><th scope="col">Description</th></tr><tr><td>six_beanshellrunner</td><td><div class="content-wrapper"><p>Allows to directly run Beanshell code in the application server and display its print output and/or the returned object. Can be used to experiment with the IIQ API or JDK methods.</p><p>The Beanshellrunner is excluded from PROD deployment and only available in testing environments.</p><ac:structured-macro ac:name="info" ac:schema-version="1" ac:macro-id="766d3e94-8ed9-4476-a4f7-3bcd0f0af7b1"><ac:rich-text-body><p>Can be used as Generic Query <em>input source</em>.</p></ac:rich-text-body></ac:structured-macro></div></td></tr><tr><td>six_connector_test</td><td><div class="content-wrapper"><p>Batch test endpoint connectivity.</p><ac:structured-macro ac:name="note" ac:schema-version="1" ac:macro-id="413bf914-b47d-4061-9d97-5b87852aab28"><ac:rich-text-body><p>Use only on backend server!</p></ac:rich-text-body></ac:structured-macro><p><strong>This needs a dedicated documentation page.</strong></p></div></td></tr><tr><td>six_deactivate_single_assignment</td><td>Temporarily or permanently deactivate SIX <em>single assignment groups</em>.</td></tr><tr><td>six_direct_connector_access</td><td><div class="content-wrapper"><p>Test connector functions (Test/Iterate/Read/Provision).</p><ac:structured-macro ac:name="note" ac:schema-version="1" ac:macro-id="cabb7d0d-fd1b-4826-bf26-3d5a128ef097"><ac:rich-text-body><p>Use only on backend server!</p></ac:rich-text-body></ac:structured-macro><p>Note that the Generic Query can read from connector iteration as well when executed on a backend server.</p></div></td></tr><tr><td>six_encode_macro</td><td>Encode OrionQL and CerberusLogic macros as XML that can be directly pasted into the macro library's XML.</td></tr><tr><td>six_encode_query_arguments</td><td>Create proxy rules from Rule Runner URLs</td></tr><tr><td>six_finish_selected_workitems</td><td>Batch approve or reject workitems</td></tr><tr><td>six_generic_query</td><td><p>This is the IIQ operator's swiss-army-knife for looking into the system. <span style="letter-spacing: 0.0px;">It is described here: </span><ac:link><ri:page ri:content-title="The Generic Query" /></ac:link></p></td></tr><tr><td>six_launcher</td><td><p>Universal launcher for Emails, Rules, Tasks and Workflows with custom parameters. Tasks optionally can be executed synchronously.</p><p><strong>This probably needs a dedicated documentation page.</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td>six_list_db_connections</td><td><p>List all active DB connections.</p><p><strong>This probably needs a dedicated documentation page.</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td>six_list_directory</td><td><div class="content-wrapper"><p>List the contents of a filesystem directory.</p><ac:structured-macro ac:name="info" ac:schema-version="1" ac:macro-id="2d80cf7e-57d6-4038-b5e2-5ce55d6ed1c2"><ac:rich-text-body><p>Can be used as Generic Query <em>input source</em>.</p></ac:rich-text-body></ac:structured-macro></div></td></tr><tr><td>six_log_configurator</td><td><p>Change the log4j2 runtime configuration in memory.</p><p><strong>This probably needs a dedicated documentation page.</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td>six_manual_reconciliation</td><td><p>Manually launch the SIX AutoReconciliation tasks for selected endpoint(s) with threshold overrides. See the <ac:link><ri:page ri:content-title="Automatic Reconciliation Usage and Configuration Guide" /></ac:link>.</p></td></tr><tr><td>six_parse_file</td><td><div class="content-wrapper"><p>Parse text files into columnar format.</p><ac:structured-macro ac:name="info" ac:schema-version="1" ac:macro-id="5dff3bea-bb30-470d-8c38-09bff8ce6c5a"><ac:rich-text-body><p>Can be used as Generic Query <em>input source</em>.</p></ac:rich-text-body></ac:structured-macro><p><strong>This probably needs a dedicated documentation page.</strong></p></div></td></tr><tr><td>six_ping (not yet implemented)</td><td><div class="content-wrapper"><p>Network level connection test of several types:</p><ul><li data-uuid="43e2de7b-e3ad-4676-b966-86cf962990dc">Ping TCP port</li><li data-uuid="caaf2e1c-ac90-4684-8f8c-040e4f200779">Ping RPC port</li><li data-uuid="a5525c02-d283-4fd0-bd84-2307b2012342">Ping SSL port</li><li data-uuid="7e19b5e2-b4cc-4bfd-a2e9-c34c7df4da5c">Ping SSL URL</li></ul><p>Multiple connections can be tested in batch.</p></div></td></tr><tr><td>six_prepare_confluence_link</td><td><div class="content-wrapper"><p>Extract parameter string from Rule Runner URL and encode problematic characters for pasting into in Confluence table transformer (<ac:link><ri:page ri:content-title="Prefabricated queries" /></ac:link>)</p></div></td></tr><tr><td>six_sql_query</td><td><div class="content-wrapper"><p>Perform queries on tables using direct SQL.</p><ac:structured-macro ac:name="info" ac:schema-version="1" ac:macro-id="154a74f5-a711-4d32-b65d-ef7f89c0bff0"><ac:rich-text-body><p>Can be used as Generic Query <em>input source</em>.</p></ac:rich-text-body></ac:structured-macro></div></td></tr><tr><td>six_terminator (not yet implemented)</td><td>Rip out an object from the database easily in one go, together with all referencing objects, by using the IIQ <code>Terminator</code> API.</td></tr><tr><td>six_thread_watcher</td><td>Simple profiler for monitoring the execution of threads running inside the JVM. It is described here: <ac:link><ri:page ri:content-title="Thread Watcher" /></ac:link></td></tr></tbody></table><h1>Inofficial rules</h1><p>Put your private rules here to make them available to your teammates before transferring them into official rules.</p><table class="wrapped"><colgroup><col /><col /></colgroup><tbody><tr><th scope="col">Rule name</th><th scope="col">Description</th></tr><tr><td><br /></td><td><br /></td></tr></tbody></table>